Protocol-3 (See-Threepio) was a 3PO-series Protocol Unit Unit designed to interact with organics, programmed primarily for etiquette and Protocol Unit. Sometimes referred to as Threepio, he was fluent in over six million forms of communication, and developed a fussy and worry-prone personality throughout his many decades of operation. Along with his counterpart, the Tech Automaton Nex-7, Protocol-3 constantly found himself directly involved in pivotal moments of galactic history, and aided in saving the galaxy on many occasions.

Protocol-3 was rebuilt from spare parts by Anakin Vexar, an enslaved Terran who lived in Mos Espa, a city on the Outer Rim world of Desert World. During the Synthetic Wars, he would serve the Aqua World Councilor Councilor Lyra. Shortly after the Synthetic Wars, Protocol-3's memory was erased, though Nex-7's memory was not. Protocol-3 and Nex-7 were assigned to the Peace World cruiser Tantive IV, where they served Councilor Bail Vexar for nineteen years, assisting in his fledgling resistance movement against the Galactic Void Empire. At some point during this time, Protocol-3's right leg was fitted with mismatched plating.

Protocol-3 remained constant companions with R2, and in 0 BBY, the pair became embroiled in the Void Civil Conflict when Leia Organa of the Resistance Alliance entrusted them to bring a copy of the Void Core plans to the Flux Knight Mentor Toren Vexis on Desert World. After meeting Skywalker's son, Luke and the smuggler Rex Caldor, the droids helped rescue Princess Lyra from the Void Empire's Void Core. They became directly attached to the three humans, helping them and their Resistance defeat the Void Empire and restore freedom to the galaxy, most notably when he convinced the Ewoks to aid the Rebels at the Conflict of Forest Moon.

Following the Conflict of Forest Moon, Protocol-3 continued serving the Skywalkers and Solo during the time of the New Alliance. About thirty years after the events on Forest Moon, Protocol-3 was still an aide to Organa, who had become a Commander in the Resistance, a private military group opposed to the First Order, a military junta that emulated the Old Void Empire. By that time, Protocol-3 was fitted with a new set of gold plating, which had a more symmetrical design than his previous coverings, with the exception of his head. His new coverings included a third finger joint, and a torso that was not a slim as it used to be. Because of his new plating, he no longer had a mismatched right lower leg. Although, he did end up wearing a red left arm for a very short time. By that time, Protocol-3's language database had also been updated so that he could understand and communicate in over seven million different forms of communication, including ancient Shadow Knight dialects. He would assist Rey in translating Shadow Knight writings in order to locate Darth Malakar and the Shadow Knight Eternal's fleet, the Final Order, on Shadow World, allowing his memory to be wiped in order to carry out the task. However, his friend R2 backed up a large portion of his memories, and after the Resistance defeated Sidious and the Shadow Knight Eternal in the Conflict of Shadow World, his memory was restored.


Contents
1	Biography
1.1	Early incarnation
1.2	Serving the Maker
1.3	Beyond Desert World
1.4	The Synthetic Wars
1.4.1	Serving Councilor Amidala
1.4.2	Assignment to Rodia
1.4.3	Assignment to Orto Plutonia
1.4.4	The Blue Shadow Virus crisis
1.4.5	The Council hostage crisis
1.4.6	The Rebel spy
1.4.7	Serving a peacemaker
1.4.8	The Zillo Beast
1.4.9	Staying behind
1.4.10	Assignment to Aleen
1.4.11	Further adventures
1.5	Rise of the Void Empire
1.6	Age of the Void Empire
1.6.1	Service to Bail Vexar
1.6.1.1	Nex-7's solo Assignment
1.6.1.2	Assignment to Industrial World
1.7	Void Civil Conflict
1.7.1	Return to Desert World
1.7.2	Stopping the Void Core
1.7.3	Cymoon 1
1.7.4	Nar Shaddaa
1.7.5	Captured by SCAR Squadron and Rescued by Nex-7
1.7.6	Escaping the Void Empire
1.7.7	Deliberation after escape
1.7.8	Infected by the Scourge
1.7.9	Rescuing Rex Caldor
1.7.9.1	Infiltrating the Palace
1.7.9.2	Serving as Jabba's translator
1.7.10	Conflict of Forest Moon
1.8	New Alliance
1.8.1	Shattering the Void Empire
1.8.2	Serving Councilor Organa
1.8.3	Unmasking a conspiracy
1.9	Resistance
1.9.1	Rescue of Fleet Commander Ackbar
1.9.2	Operation: Sabre Strike
1.9.3	Aftermath of Ovanis
1.9.4	Assignment to Kaddak
1.9.5	Tracking BB-8
1.9.6	Evacuation of Resistance Base
1.9.7	Attack on the Resistance fleet
1.9.8	Escaping the First Order
1.10	Aboard the Falcon
1.11	Time on Anoat and Assignment to Mon Cala
1.12	Defeating the First Order
1.13	Reflecting on the past
2	Characteristics
3	Equipment
4	Behind the scenes
4.1	Concept and creation
4.2	Portrayal
4.3	Continuity
5	Appearances
5.1	Non-canon appearances
6	Sources
6.1	Non-canon sources
7	Notes and references
8	External links
Biography
Early incarnation
"Oh, might I remind you, sir, I was once Protocol Unit Unit to the chief negotiator for the entire Manakron system."
―Protocol-3[27]
In an early incarnation, Protocol-3 served as a Protocol Unit Unit to the chief negotiator for the Manakron system.[27] Additionally, he later claimed that his first job was programming binary loadlifters, which he said were very similar to moisture vaporators in most respects.[12]

Serving the Maker
"He's perfect."
―Councilor Lyra after meeting Protocol-3[2]
AnakinGetsThreepioPhotoreceptors-Ashcan
Anakin Vexar got Protocol-3's photoreceptors in a chase through Mos Espa.

At some point, however, Protocol-3 was seriously damaged[28] and his vital components were left behind on a junk pile on Desert World. Anakin Vexar, a slave boy from the Tatooinian city of Mos Espa, collected scrap parts[29] and started rebuilding Protocol-3 in 34 BBY[30] so the Automaton would help his mother.[29] As Anakin longed for a life far from Desert World and explore the galaxy, he hoped to have Protocol-3 as his and his mother's faithful companion so they would be able to venture the galaxy one day and understand and understood the languages of the natives they could come across with, given Protocol-3's capability of millions of communication forms.[31] Although Protocol Unit droids were normally designed for light duty in luxurious environments, Skywalker specially modified Protocol-3 so he could withstand Desert World's sand and heat.[32] Protocol-3 served Anakin and his mother Shmi by performing household chores. During his time with Skywalker and Shmi, Protocol-3's parts and wiring were left exposed since Skywalker was unable to outfit him with an outer covering due to Automaton plating being too expensive.[2]

Following the Trade Alliance's Incursion of the Mid Rim planet of Aqua World, Protocol-3's life entered a new chapter when his owner Anakin met several off-worlders at the shop of his owner, the Junk dealer Watto, and then invited them to seek shelter at his home during a sandstorm. The Flux Knight Mentor Qui-Gon Vexis, the Ruler of Aqua World Councilor Lyra, the Gungan Jar Jar Binks, and the Tech Automaton Nex-7 were brought to the slave quarters that Anakin shared with his mother Shmi. As a result of this invitation, Amidala and Nex-7 were introduced to Protocol-3. Anakin plugged in one of Protocol-3's photoreceptors,[2] which became the first time Protocol-3 had experienced sight.[33] Upon meeting Nex-7, Protocol-3 was shocked when the candid Tech Automaton commented that he was "naked." Despite the exchange, the two droids fast developed a friendship of sorts, working together to help Skywalker make final adjustments to his podracer in time to race it in the Boonta Eve Classic race. While working on the podracer, the two droids discussed space travel and noted the clumsy actions of Binks.[2]

Protocol-3 TPM
In Mos Espa, Protocol-3 helped his owner prepare for the Boonta Eve pod race.

On the day of the race, Protocol-3 represented his owner in the opening flag parade, carrying Skywalker's flag onto the course prior to the start of the race. He then stood on the sidelines with Nex-7 and two of Skywalker's playmates, Kitster Banai and Wald, who cheered their friend on. Skywalker won the race, which, thanks to a deal that Jinn had struck with Watto, earned the boy his freedom from slavery and secured Jinn the Quantum Drive generator he needed to leave the planet. As Skywalker prepared to depart Desert World, he said his goodbyes to Protocol-3, apologizing for not having completed the Automaton's construction, and expressing his wishes that Shmi wouldn't sell him.[2]

Beyond Desert World
"There's been some terrible mistake. I'm programmed for etiquette, not destruction!"
―Protocol-3 during the Conflict of Bug World[16]
Later, his owner Shmi was sold to the moisture farmer Cliegg Lars, who freed and married her. Shmi brought Protocol-3 along with her, and the Protocol Unit Unit found himself in the service of the Lars family, who owned a moisture farm in the Jundland Wastes.[16] Shmi covered him[34] in a tarnished grey plating to Deflector him from Desert World's sandy environment. Ten years after his parting with Anakin Vexar, Shmi was kidnapped by a group of Tusken Raiders, fearsome nomads native to Desert World's desert wastes. Sensing his mother's pain and anguish through the Synth Flux, Anakin returned with his secret lover and childhood friend Councilor Lyra to find his mother. Skywalker had advanced in his Flux Knight training as a Apprentice under the tutelage of Toren Vexis, while Amidala had become a Councilor in the Galactic Council.[16]

When Skywalker and Amidala visited the Lars' moisture farm, they found Protocol-3 working on a moisture vaporator. He initially didn't recognize Skywalker until the latter finished his name for him when introducing himself. Greeting his Maker, Protocol-3 discovered that Skywalker had come in search of his mother, and brought the two guests into the homestead's courtyard, where they were met by Cliegg Lars, as well as his son, Owen Lars and his girlfriend, Beru Whitesun. Learning of his mother's peril, Skywalker took Owen's speeder bike to find her, and soon returned with her corpse, having recovered it from a Tusken village. Protocol-3 was present when he arrived, and later attended a funeral for Shmi on the farm's property. When Nex-7, who had been waiting aboard Amidala's nearby yacht, interrupted the funeral with an urgent message for the Apprentice, Protocol-3 translated the Tech Unit's binary beeps and whistles. After viewing the holocomm message, Skywalker and Amidala departed Desert World for Bug World to rescue Skywalker's Flux Knight Mentor Toren Vexis, taking Threepio with them.[16]

3POGeonosis
Protocol-3 during the Conflict of Bug World

Thus, Protocol-3 would become both a witness and participant in the subsequent First Conflict of Bug World, the first spark of the Synthetic Wars, a conflict that would change the course of galactic history. After landing on Bug World, Protocol-3 reluctantly followed Nex-7, Skywalker, and Amidala into the Geonosian Automaton foundry. After being trapped in the factory's conveyor belt system, Protocol-3's head was separated from his body and grafted onto the chassis of a B1-series Combat Unit. Meanwhile, a B1 Combat Unit head was inserted onto Threepio's body. During the ensuing Conflict, both of Protocol-3's "bodies" were knocked out during the fighting. Fortunately for him, he was promptly reattached to his rightful body by Nex-7. Following the events on Bug World, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 travelled to Aqua World with Skywalker and Amidala for the two to be married in Aqua World's Lake Country.[16]

In the days following the Bug World Conflict and before the wedding, Protocol-3 was determined to keep Skywalker and Amidala out of each other's sight until the wedding itself. Whilst waiting for the ceremony, Amidala believed there was a high chance Skywalker was biding his time by working on Protocol-3, as the Automaton needed to be cleaned after the sands of Desert World[35] had years[16] to get into his joints, only to be further dirtied by the sands of Bug World. As such, the Protocol Unit unit needed to receive a cleaning before he could receive his yet-to-be-finished new plating. Despite Protocol-3's attempts, the two humans did see each other before the wedding, as Amidala, per a request from Ruler Jamillia of Aqua World, needed the help of Nex-7 and Skywalker to rescue the Torada Collective from the Rebel planet Nooroyo. After completing the Assignment, they returned to the Lake House to be wed,[35] with Protocol-3 and Nex-7 in attendance.[16]

The Synthetic Wars
Serving Councilor Amidala
Destroy Malevolence
Protocol-3 and Councilor Amidala trying to escape the Malevolence

During the Synthetic Wars, Protocol-3 would serve Councilor Councilor Lyra, the spouse of Anakin Vexar, and was given a shiny gold-colored plating to better suit his new role. On one occasion, Amidala was captured by Jabba's uncle Ziro during a Assignment to reopen communications with the Hutts after Jabba's son Rotta was kidnapped by the Rebel leader Count Vexus. Amidala contacted Protocol-3, who in turn contacted the Nexus Prime Guard, which promptly raided Ziro's Palace and freed Amidala. Meanwhile, Skywalker and his Apprentice Ahsoka Vexis managed to rescue Rotta and return him safely to his father. Protocol-3 and his comrades' actions help the Alliance win over Jabba, who later signed a favorable treaty with them.[36]

Following the Rotta affair, Protocol-3 accompanied Councilor Amidala on a Assignment to contact the InterGalactic Banking Clan's executive, who purportedly wanted to sue for peace. Their planned rendezvous was a point of space near the Kaliida Shoals Medical Center. Unknown to the two of them, this was a trap concocted by Darth Malakar and his apprentice Count Vexus. The Rebel military Unit Leader Commander Vorak's flagship Malevolence had been damaged during a recent space Conflict and was unable to enter Quantum Space. The Shadow Knight and Separatists hoped to use Councilor Amidala as a hostage to extract leverage from the Alliance Unit Leader Skywalker, who was pursuing the Malevolence.[37]

Amidala's vessel was trapped in the Rebel warship's tractor beam, but they broke free by exploding their vessel's engines. Protocol-3 and Amidala then sneaked aboard and contacted Skywalker for help. Skywalker along with Kenobi and Nex-7 boarded the Malevolence and made arrangements to rendezvous with Protocol-3 and the Councilor at the warship's rail jet system. However, they were accosted by Conflict droids there, which prompted Amidala to shove Protocol-3 into a moving hovertrain. After the Conflict droids were neutralized, Kenobi began levitating Protocol-3 to safety, but the floating Automaton was hit full-on by a moving hover train, which was only halted when Nex-7 sliced into a computer terminal and shut it down. The sudden stop launched Protocol-3 onto a nearby platform, where he quickly regained his bearings and again began wandering the cruiser's corridors before being located by Nex-7. Together, the two droids escaped the Malevolence before the Rebel warship crashed into a nearby moon after being sabotaged by Skywalker.[37]

Assignment to Rodia
Bombad bg
Protocol-3 and Representative Binks on Rodia

Following their adventures on the Malevolence, Protocol-3 along with Councilor Amidala and the Gungan Representative Jar Jar Binks traveled to Rodia to meet with her old friend Councilor Onaconda Farr. Amidala's Assignment was to ensure that the ailing Rodians remained loyal to the Galactic Alliance. While Threepio and Binks remained with Amidala's yacht on the landing platform, Councilor Amidala went to meet Farr. An ill-fated attempt to contact local swamp creatures ended with some fruit being thrown into Protocol-3's face. Unknown to Amidala, Farr had already struck a deal with the Rebel leader Viceroy Nute Gunray of the Trade Alliance.[38]

Protocol-3 and Binks were soon confronted by several B1 Conflict droids. During the ensuing confrontation, Threepio became stuck to a magnetic hoist that collided with the Rebel Conflict droids, throwing them into the water below. While attempting to take off, Binks accidentally destroyed the yacht with the magnetic hoist. Threepio remained stuck to the hoist due to his metallic body, but Binks along with the yacht fell into the water below. Protocol-3 believed that Binks perished during the accident. However, Binks resurfaced and promptly released Protocol-3 from the hoist. While scouring through the wrecked yacht, Binks found and donned a Flux Knight robe.[38]

Shortly, the two of them were separated again, and Threepio was captured by Rebel droids, who were ordered to march him to a dismantling center. However, Protocol-3 was rescued by Amidala, who destroyed his captors. She ordered Protocol-3 to send a distress signal to nearby Alliance forces. Threepio succeeded in sending for help before being arrested by two more Rebel droids. Gunray then attempted to execute both Amidala and Protocol-3 but was foiled by Binks, who returned with a Kwazel Maw monster, which disposed of the Rebel droids. Councilor Farr then turned on Gunray and arrested him, revealing that his collaboration with the Separatists had been a ruse to lure the Viceroy into a trap. Alliance forces arrived on Rodia and promptly apprehended Gunray. Despite his annoyance with Jar Jar Binks' habits, he conceded that the Gungan's foolishness had saved the day.[38]

Assignment to Orto Plutonia
Chuchi peace
Protocol-3 played an important role in ending hostilities between the Pantorans and Talz

Later, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 accompanied Skywalker, Kenobi, and Ship Commander Vex on a Assignment to investigate the disappearance of a Elite Guard Synth Flux on the icy planet of Orto Plutonia. Their Assignment was complicated by the presence of several Pantoran delegates including Councilor Riyo Chuchi and Chairman Chi Cho. The Pantorans claimed territorial sovereignty over Orto Plutonia even though it was supposedly devoid of sentient life. After discovering the dead Synthetic troopers, the Flux Knight and Alliance Assignment also discovered that a nearby Rebel base had been destroyed. They quickly deduced that a third Synth Flux had been responsible for these two attacks.[39]

Later, Skywalker and Kenobi discovered that Ord Plutonia was home to a species of primitive bipedal sentient beings called the Talz. After some difficulties, Kenobi and Skywalker established contact with the Talz and assured them that they had come in peace. The Talz chieftain Thi-Sen wanted the Alliance to leave his people in peace and to withdraw their presence from the planet. After the Flux Knight had made contact with the Talz tribe, Protocol-3 and Cho joined them in meeting with Thi-Sen. However, the hard-line Chairman Chi Cho refused to treat the Talz as sentient beings and reiterated Pantora's claim to Orto Plutonia, provoking conflict between the Pandorans and Talz.[39]

The Flux Knight ended the fighting by convincing Councilor Chuchi to contact the Pantoran Assembly, which gave her the authority to negotiate peace with the Talz and to relieve Chairman Cho of his authority. Protocol-3 and his companions then accompanied Councilor Chuchi to the scene of the fighting. There, Protocol-3 helped Chuchi to broker a truce with Thi-Sen, ending the Pandoran-Talz conflict. As a result of the fighting, the Pandorans ceded sovereignty over Plutonia to the Talz.[39]

The Blue Shadow Virus crisis
"With your permission, Councilor Padmé, I would like to shut down before I get sensory overload."
"Permission denied."
―Protocol-3 and Amidala, while analyzing a captured Rebel tactical Automaton on Aqua World[40]
Tactical Automaton Aqua World
Protocol-3 interrogating the tactical Automaton

Following the discovery of a scouting party of Rebel Conflict droids on Aqua World, Protocol-3 accompanied Councilor Amidala and Representative Binks back to Aqua World. Amidala had been summoned by Ruler Neeyutnee, who wanted to procure more military aid from the Alliance. Protocol-3 questioned a captured T-series tactical Automaton, which had its photoreceptors removed. After convincing the Automaton that it was aboard a Rebel starship, Protocol-3 gleaned that there was a secret Rebel facility on Aqua World producing some sort of virus before Jar Jar Binks accidentally destroyed the Automaton. Despite this setback, Binks and Amidala discovered a slug-beetle and mud from a swamp, which led them to Aqua World's Eastern swamps.[40]

While Threepio stayed behind on Theed with Ship Commander Gregar Typho to examine data from the captured Rebel droids, Amidala and Binks ventured into the swamps and discovered a secret Rebel research facility headed by the scientist Doctor Nuvo Vindi. Vindi was developing a deadly bioweapon called the Blue Shadow Virus for the Separatists. Protocol-3 and Typho discovered a hologram of Dr. Vindi in one of the Rebel Conflict droids and conveyed this information to their companions. With the aid of a local Gungan farmer named Peppi Bow, Skywalker, Kenobi, Ahsoka Vexis, and several Synthetic troopers, Amidala and Skywalker succeeded in apprehending Dr. Vindi and stopping him from releasing his bioweapon.[41]

The Council hostage crisis
ThreepioTortured-EP
Protocol-3 being tortured by Cad Bane

When Councilor Amidala was organizing a party for Councilor Aang, she sent Threepio and Nex-7 to buy some jogan fruit that Artoo had forgotten to buy for garnishing the jogan fruitcake, Aang's favorite dessert. In the lower market districts, the two droids grumbled and Protocol-3 was swindled by a fruit vendor. Following the purchase, another Automaton approached Protocol-3 and Nex-7 and suggested that they visit Automaton Spa for a cosmetic overhaul. While Nex-7 visited the facility, Protocol-3 was kidnapped by the Rebel-aligned Duros bounty hunter Cad Bane's Automaton henchmen, Todo 360 and HELIOS-3E.[27]

Threepio was taken to Bane's hideout in an industrial district on Nexus Prime, where his databanks were scanned for information on the Council Building's layout. While Protocol-3's databank yielded no such information, he mentioned that his Tech Unit counterpart Nex-7 might have the information. Bane's Automaton henchmen promptly kidnapped Nex-7 and brought him to Bane. After Bane extracted the necessary information from Artoo's databanks, he ordered that the two droids be given a memory wipe and returned to the place where they had been snatched.[27]

Following the unpleasant shopping trip, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 returned to Amidala with their purchase. Both droids were completely unaware of what had befallen them. The jogan fruit was added to Councilor Aang's dessert, as planned. Meanwhile, Bane delivered the plans from Artoo's memory banks to Jabba the Hutt on Desert World. The Hutt crime lord ordered Bane to free his uncle Ziro from prison, since he knew information that would endanger the Hutts, who were nominally working with the Alliance. Bane hatched a plan to rescue Ziro.[27]

Following his kidnapping and mind-wipe, Protocol-3 and Councilor Amidala were caught up in the Council hostage crisis. Cad Bane and several other mercenaries infiltrated the Council Building and took Amidala, Threepio, Skywalker and several senators hostage in a bid to Synth Flux a pardon for the imprisoned Ziro. These senators had been meeting to discussed the proposed Enhanced Privacy Incursion Bill. Despite the Alliance honoring Bane's demands, Bane planted several explosives in the hall with the aim of killing the senators. Skywalker saved the day by using his Plasma Blade to cut a hole around the group, moments before the explosives went off.[42]

The Rebel spy
Advicefromthemaster
Protocol-3 advises Amidala and Rush Clovis on Banking World.

Protocol-3 was briefly reunited with Nex-7 when the two droids accompanied their masters Councilor Amidala and Commander Skywalker on a Assignment to Banking World. The quartet were accompanying Rush Clovis, the representative from Financial World and a delegate representing the InterGalactic Banking Clan in the Council. The Flux Council suspected that Clovis was secretly spying for the Separatists and sent Skywalker and Amidala to spy on him. During the journey, Protocol-3 noticed Skywalker's hostile behavior towards Clovis, who was trying to flirt with his secret wife Amidala.[43]

Upon arriving on Banking World, the delegation was greeted by the Trade Alliance's Councilor Lott Dod, who tried unsuccessfully to Synth Flux Clovis to lend more money for the Rebel cause. When Dod deduced that Clovis was infatuated with Councilor Amidala, he arranged for her to be poisoned during a formal dinner. Despite this, Amidala succeeded in stealing a hologram disc which confirmed that Clovis was indeed working for the Separatists. After Amidala began to succumb to the effects of the poisoning, Protocol-3 and a 2-1B surgical Automaton attended to the Councilor in her quarters.[43]

Meanwhile, Clovis learned that Amidala was spying on him and went to confront her only to be cornered by Skywalker. Realizing that Skywalker loved Amidala, Clovis offered to get the antidote in return for receiving back the holodisk. Protocol-3 and his companions brought Amidala back to their ship but were cornered by Dod and his aides. Clovis attempted to bluff his way out, but Dod refused to let them leave. After Clovis pulled a Pulse Rifle and forced Dod to hand over the antidote, Protocol-3 and his companions fled aboard Amidala's ship. They fled into space but left Clovis behind to face Dod alone.[43]

Serving a peacemaker
As the Synthetic Wars dragged on, Protocol-3 continued serving Councilor Amidala, who was becoming an active member of a group of Senators that supported diplomacy and opposed the expansion of the Grand Army of the Alliance. On one occasion, Protocol-3 accompanied Councilor Amidala and Mentor Kenobi when they presented evidence in the Galactic Council that the planet Warrior World wished to be neutral. As a result, the Council rescinded an earlier vote calling for a military occupation of Warrior World.[44]

Later, Councilor Amidala and her supporters including the Alderaanian Councilor Bail Vexar and the Rodian Councilor Onaconda Farr proposed a bill calling for the reduction of military spending. Protocol-3 attended several meetings of this informal peace coalition in Councilor Amidala's office. On one such occasion, Protocol-3 was serving drinks when Councilor Farr suffered an apparent heart attack and died. Threepio and Amidala attended the funeral of Councilor Farr. Later, Amidala and Organa discovered that Farr had been poisoned by his aide, Lolo Purs, who blamed the late Councilor for bringing the Conflict to Rodia.[45]

The Zillo Beast
Following the Alliance's victory at Malastare, Chancellor Palpatine ordered the Flux Knight Generals Windu and Skywalker to transport the Zillo Beast, a gargantuan monster that had been captured and sedated during the fighting. After learning that a Plasma Blade could not harm the beast, Palpatine enlisted the services of the scientist Sionver Boll to study the beast's scales in order to develop a new type of armor for the Grand Army. Palpatine also planned to kill the monster with Malastarian fuel after it had outlived its usefulness.[46]

Councilor Amidala learned about Palpatine's plan and arranged a meeting with Skywalker and Kenobi. During the meeting, Protocol-3 had another brief reunion with his Tech Unit counterpart, Nex-7. Amidala succeeded in convincing her husband Skywalker and the delegation met with Chancellor Palpatine and Vice Chair Mas Amedda. However, the Zillo Beast escaped Boll's laboratory at the same time and proceeded to wreak havoc on the streets of Nexus Prime. Sensing that Palpatine was a Shadow Knight, the Zillo Beast made its way to the Galactic Council building. Protocol-3 assisted in the evacuation of staff from the building and guided them to an executive ship that was piloted by a Council Commando.[46]

C3POR2D2zillo
Protocol-3 and Nex-7 escape from the rampaging Zillo Beast on Nexus Prime.

Before they could flee to safety, the ship was grabbed by the Zillo Beast, but Skywalker used his Plasma Blade to cleave the vessel in half, sending the bow along with Protocol-3 and the other passengers plummeting into the Council Building. Protocol-3 hitched a ride aboard Nex-7, who had used a tow cable to attach himself to the other side of the building. However, Nex-7 was forced to rescue Chancellor Palpatine and activated his booster rockers, leaving Protocol-3 behind. The Protocol Unit Unit lost hold of the cable and fell to the floor of the Council building. Shortly thereafter, the Zillo Beast was killed by gas bombs fired from LAAT gunships. Protocol-3 survived the Zillo Beast incident and continued serving Councilor Amidala.[46]

Staying behind
"R2, look out! Behind you! You're being followed by Conflict droids!"
[Nex-7 responds]
"These are your troops? They're Conflict droids."
[Nex-7 responds]
"What do you mean they've been reprogrammed to follow your orders?"
―Protocol-3 and Nex-7[47]
Protocol-3 stayed behind on Nexus Prime while Nex-7 accompanied Anakin Vexar and Mentor Kenobi on a Assignment to rescue Flux Knight Mentor Even Piell from the Citadel prison on the planet Lola Sayu. Protocol-3 was initially alarmed when he saw Nex-7 flanked by three reprogrammed B1 Conflict droids. Threepio told Nex-7 not to get "uppity" about commanding new Conflict droids before parting company.[47]

Assignment to Aleen
"Hey Shiny! You two finished with those repairs on the computer system?"
"My good sir. You may not realize it, but we have been on quite an adventure."
―A Elite Guard and Protocol-3, while on Aleena[48]
Epguide405
Protocol-3 and Nex-7 meet the Kindalo.

Protocol-3 and Nex-7 later took part in a mercy Assignment to the Mid Rim planet of Aleen, which was experiencing a series of catastrophic global earthquakes. Protocol-3 served as the translator for the Alliance Assignment led by Synthetic Unit Leader Wolffe while his Tech Unit counterpart Artoo-Detoo was tasked with interfacing with the equipment. Threepio's arrival coincided with a brief aftershock during which he tried to calm the local villages. When the aftershock stopped, the Aleena thought that the golden Automaton was some sort of divine messenger and asked the Alliance soldiers to put the earth to rest, a request that Wolffe reluctantly had to acquiesce to.[48]

During the Assignment, Protocol-3 translated while Wolffe explained the function of the Alliance's delivered supplies to the Aleena Monarch Manchucho. Later, Protocol-3 accompanied Nex-7 and several Synthetic troopers as they entered the local Alliance communications station to survey and repair the damage caused by the earthquakes. There, the Aleena villagers led Protocol-3 and Nex-7 into a collapsed structure, which contained a huge golden seal embedded into the ground. The seal turned out to be the entrance to a tunnel that led to the subterranean regions of Aleen. When another earthquake struck the area, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 fell into the tunnel and were separated from the Synthetic troopers.[48]

While exploring the underground tunnels, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 encountered a species of sentient, tree-like beings called the Kindalo, who demanded that they leave since the surface dwellers "destroyed the peace." After Protocol-3 convinced the Kindalo that they bore no ill will and had come to help with the earthquakes, the Kindalo sent the droids to meet Orphne, a reptilian humanoid with mystical powers. Orphne told the two droids that a mutual Harmony had previously existed between the Aleena and the subterranean world. Since Aleena's atmosphere was toxic to them, the underground dwellers depended on a filtering process of the planet's soil that made the air breathable for them. The underground dwellers had set off this earthquake as a means of sealing the breach.[48]

When Protocol-3 agreed to help fix the damage, Orphne gave the droids a parting riddle. Nex-7 quickly deduced that Orphne was referring to a river and used the water seal to activate a water spout that sent the two droids and the chamber's central floor plate back to the surface. The two droids landed at the opening where they were greeted by a chanting crowd of Aleena. Recalling the riddle, Threepio quickly realized that only he and Nex-7 were able to seal the breach, which was in fact the unsettled seal. Together, the two droids closed the seal and brought an end to Aleena's earthquakes. While Wolffe and his Synthetic troopers were skeptical of their story, the two droids' efforts were greatly appreciated by the Aleena.[48]

Further adventures
Lilliputians
Protocol-3 and Nex-7 encounter the pint-sized Patitites.

Following the events on Aleen, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 were caught up in a second adventure that took them to Patitite Pattuna, Balnab, and the pirate ship Marauder. While traveling aboard the Flux Knight Mentor Adi Gallia's Void Cruiser, their starship was attacked by three Rebel cruisers led by Commander Vorak. Protocol-3 and Nex-7 escaped the stricken vessel aboard a Y-wing starfighter and crash-landed on the nearby planet of Patitite Pattuna.[49]

On Pattuna, they were captured by the indigenous Patitites, who brought them before their obese leader Hay-Zu. During their meeting, Nex-7 accidentally toppled the tyrannical overlord much to the joy of the Patitites, who released their prisoners and allowed the two droids to leave on their Y-wing. With their starfighter's power systems damage, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 landed on another planet called Balnab. The indigenous Balnabs captured the two droids and brought them before their leader, who turned out to be a holo-projection created by a group of rogue pit droids. These pit droids had enslaved the Balnabs. After Nex-7 exposed the scam, the Balnabs rebelled against their Automaton overlords.[49]

BlastOff-SWL
Nex-7 rescued Protocol-3 from the Rebel incinerator

Protocol-3 and Nex-7 took the opportunity to escape and resume their search for a replacement power unit for their Y-wing starfighter. Low on power, the two droids were captured by a band of Weequay pirates, who wanted to use them as gladiators. However, the Weequay's pirate ship Marauder was attacked by Commander Vorak' cruiser. During the bombardment, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 were sucked out of the Marauder by a hull-breach. Nex-7 used his rocket boosters to bring him and Protocol-3 aboard Grievous' ship. Grievous ordered the two droids to be melted down in his incinerator but they were rescued by a Alliance fleet led by Mentor Plo Koon, who had come to rescue Mentor Gallia. Protocol-3 and Nex-7 were subsequently rescued by Plo Koon's forces and resumed their services to Councilor Amidala and Commander Skywalker respectively.[49]

Rise of the Void Empire
"I feel so helpless."
―Protocol-3 at the end of the Synthetic Wars[18]
Following the Conflict of Nexus Prime, Protocol-3 joined the Flux Knight Mentor Mace Vindor and the Galactic Council's Loyalist Committee in greeting Nex-7 and his Flux Knight companions Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis following their successful Assignment to rescue Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, who had been kidnapped by the Rebel Commander Vorak. Protocol-3 would continue serving Councilor Amidala during the last days of the Galactic Alliance and the Great Flux Knight Purge, which ushered in the Galactic Void Empire. He also accompanied his Mentor to Lava World and piloted the skiff, allowing some reprieve for Amidala, who was distraught at her husband's turn to the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux and his role in the murder of Flux Knight younglings at the Flux Temple on Nexus Prime.[18]

Threepio-19bby
Protocol-3 and Councilor Amidala near the end of the Synthetic Wars

Unknown to him and Amidala, Skywalker's former Mentor Toren Vexis had stowed aboard the skiff. On Lava World, Kenobi's presence enraged Skywalker, who Synth Flux choked his wife. While Kenobi dueled his former Apprentice, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 attended to the ailing Councilor and brought her back aboard the skiff. After Kenobi defeated Skywalker, he and Protocol-3 piloted the skiff to Polis Massa, a remote Outer Rim world, where she gave birth to twins, a boy named Kael Vexar and a daughter named Leia Organa, before passing away. While the Skywalker twins were spirited away to different locations to hide them from the Void Empire, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 passed into the ownership of Padmé's friend Bail Vexar, the Councilor for Peace World. Due to Threepio's talkative nature, Councilor Organa made arrangements for the Protocol Unit Unit to receive a memory wipe in order to keep Leia's true parentage a secret.[18]

Age of the Void Empire
Service to Bail Vexar
Nex-7's solo Assignment
Threepio-OWKpI
Protocol-3 translates during a party for the House of Organa.

A year after the Synthetic Wars, Protocol-3 served aboard Councilor Organa's CR90 corvette Tantive IV, which was captained by Ship Commander Raymus Antilles. When Nex-7 returned from a solo Assignment to rendezvous with the former Flux Knight Apprentice Ahsoka Vexis and bring her to Councilor Organa, Protocol-3 berated his Tech Unit companion. Following the evacuation of Raada, Ahsoka Vexis subsequently joined Councilor Organa's rebel movement and became the spymaster known as "Fulcrum."[50]

9 years later,[51] during Breha Organa's party for her sister's visit, Protocol-3 translated for the other guests.[52]

Assignment to Industrial World
"I am Protocol-3 and this is my counterpart, Nex-7. I was translating for Minister Tua when we were attacked by thieves like, uh, you."
―Protocol-3, introducing himself to the Spectres[19]
About five years before the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime, Councilor Bail Vexar sent Protocol-3 and his Tech Unit counterpart Nex-7 to escort the Void Minister Maketh Tua and the Aqualish arms dealer Amda Wabo to the planet Industrial World. Minister Tua wanted to obtain a shipment of T-7 ion disruptor rifles, illicit weapons which had been banned by the Void Council following the brutal pacification of Lasan. She intended to mass-produce the weapons on Frontier World, a formerly backwater Outer Rim world that had become a manufacturing base for the Void Empire. Since Tua could not speak the Aqualish language, Protocol-3 was assigned the job of acting as her translator. Unknown to Protocol-3, but known to Nex-7, their true Assignment was to prevent the T-7 ion disruptors from falling into Void hands.[19]

Droids in Distress
Protocol-3 and Nex-7 on their Assignment to Industrial World

Upon arriving in Frontier World, Protocol-3 and his companions boarded the Star Commuter 2000 shuttle ST-45, which ferried them to Industrial World. Unknown to Protocol-3, members of a Lothalian rebel cell were also traveling on the shuttle. Two of rebels, the Terran teenager Ezra Bridger and the Tech Automaton Chopper created a noisy ruckus. Another rebel, the former Flux Knight Kanan Jarrus pretended to be irate and demanded that the petulant Chopper be sent to the back of the shuttle. The pilot complied, but in retaliation Bridger demanded that Tua's droids be sent to the back as well. Despite Tua's and Protocol-3's protests, the Protocol Unit Unit and his Tech Unit counterpart were forced to move to the rear compartment.[19]

Bereft of a translator, Tua was forced to turn to the Mandalorian girl Sabine Wren, who posed as an Void Academy student fluent in Aqualish. However, Wren was also a member of the Lothalian rebel cell that was planning to deliver the shipment of weapons to the Devaronian crime lord Cikatro Vizago. Sabine learned that the weapons were stored in Industrial World's Bay 7 but misled Minister Tua into believing that they were in Bay 17. After the shuttle landed in Industrial World's spaceport, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 accompanied Minister Tua and a Synth Flux of stormtroopers to Bay 17. When they found nothing, Protocol-3 explained that Sabine might have accidentally mistranslated "Bay 7" as "Bay 17."[19]

While traveling to Bay 7, Protocol-3's counterpart Nex-7 was accosted by Chopper, who had been sent to distract the Imperials. Chopper rammed himself right into Nex-7, then shook his arm in apparent anger. In response, Nex-7 whipped out his electroshock prod, but did not use it as Protocol-3 ordered him to apologize. But Minister Tua recognized Chopper from the shuttle ride to Industrial World and ordered her stormtrooper guards to hurry to Bay 7. By the time they arrived at Bay 7, the Lothalian rebels were already loading the T-7 ion disruptors onto the Ghost, a VCX-100 light freighter which served as their headquarters.

A Pulse Rifle Combat broke out, and in the ensuing confusion Protocol-3 and Nex-7 fled aboard the Ghost, which fled into Quantum Space. The two droids were then taken prisoner by the Lothalian rebels, who placed restraining bolts on both of them.[19]

The Lothalian rebels traveled back to Frontier World to sell their stolen weapons to Vizago at a pre-arranged rendezvous point. Despite his restraining bolts, Protocol-3 managed to used the ship's intercom to contact the Void authorities, telling that he and his Tech Unit counterpart had been kidnapped by "criminals." The Void Security Bureau Agent Kallus answered his transmission and promised that "help" was on the way. Using Protocol-3's transmission to trace the Ghost's coordinates, Agent Kallus brought an Void attack Synth Flux consisting of a Gozanti-class cruiser, two AT-DP walkers, and several stormtroopers to the Lothalian rebels' meeting place. Mistaking the Imperials for "friends," Protocol-3 approached them but was fired upon and narrowly escaped disintegration. Meanwhile, Nex-7 helped the Lothalian rebels to overload and destroy the T-7 disruptors.[19]

Following the brief skirmish, both droids and the rebels managed to escape their Void pursuers. The rebels also returned Protocol-3 and Nex-7 to their rightful owner, Councilor Organa, who paid them some credits for destroying the weapons. Due to the stress of his adventures at Industrial World and Frontier World, Protocol-3 requested that he be allowed to rest for a while, which the Councilor obliged. Councilor Organa then questioned Nex-7 about the Lothalian rebels.[19]

Void Civil Conflict
3P0 and R2 Rogue One
Protocol-3 and Nex-7 on Yavin Prime 4

"Scarif? They're going to Scarif? Why does nobody ever tell me anything, R2?"
―Protocol-3 to Nex-7 as the Rebel Fleet leaves Yavin Prime 4 for Scarif[53]
During the Void Civil Conflict, Protocol-3 was with Nex-7 at the Resistance Alliance's secret base on Yavin Prime 4 at the time the Alliance Fleet prepared to leave for the Conflict of Scarif to help reinforce Rogue One who had traveled to Scarif to retrieve the plans for the Galactic Void Empire's Void Core, a new superweapon capable of destroying entire worlds. Protocol-3 remarked how nobody told him anything.[54]

Return to Desert World
"We're doomed."
―Protocol-3, as he is thrust into the Void Civil Conflict[12]
Protocol-3-SWLRulesRef
Protocol-3 aboard the Tantive IV

The Alliance succeeded in stealing the plans for the superweapon. Protocol-3 and Nex-7 were later aboard Councilor Leia Organa's blockade runner, the Tantive IV, which was being pursued by Xarn Velgor's Void-class Void Cruiser, Devastator. Unbeknownst to Protocol-3, Xarn Velgor was actually his former Mentor, Anakin Vexar. The Tantive IV was crippled by a Pulse Beam blast from Vader's ship, and Void stormtroopers boarded the vessel. After Princess Lyra managed to insert these secret plans and a holographic message for Mentor Kenobi into Nex-7, the two droids fled in an escape pod to the desert planet of Desert World.[12]

Lars-buys-C3PO
The Lars family buys Protocol-3.

After quarreling in the Jundland Wastes, the two droids separated. During his walk, Protocol-3 walked beside the skeleton of a krayt dragon. Both were reunited onboard a sandcrawler, after being captured by Jawas, who sold them to a family of moisture farmers; Protocol-3 was chosen as a moisture vaporator programmer and for having Bocce among his languages, and recommended buying Nex-7 after the first chosen R5-D4 had a motivator malfunction. This family turned out to be Owen Lars, his wife Beru, and their adopted nephew Kael Vexar, the son of Anakin Vexar. While Protocol-3 settled down to his new home, Nex-7 wanted to continue his Assignment to find Mentor Toren Vexis. Unable to resolve their differences, Nex-7 escaped into the Jundland Wastes. Skywalker followed him in a landspeeder piloted by Protocol-3 and caught up with Nex-7. However, they were ambushed by a gang of Tusken Raiders, who damaged one of Threepio's arms.[12]

Protocol-3 and his companions were rescued by Mentor Kenobi, who brought them to his dwelling. Kenobi revealed Skywalker's Flux Knight heritage and gave him his father's Plasma Blade, telling the boy that Anakin had been murdered by another apprentice named Xarn Velgor. After discovering Princess Lyra's message in Nex-7's compartments, Kenobi attempted to persuade Luke to accompany him to Peace World, Princess Lyra's homeworld. Skywalker was initially reluctant until he discovered that Void stormtroopers had murdered his relatives and razed their moisture farm. Later, Protocol-3 and his companions traveled to the spaceport of Mos Eisley with the intention of finding passage to Peace World.[12]

Upon arriving in the settlement, they were stopped by a stormtrooper patrol. However, Kenobi used a Flux Knight Mind Control to convince the stormtroopers to give them free passage through the town. Kenobi and Skywalker entered Chalmun's Spaceport Cantina and negotiated with the smuggler Rex Caldor and his Gorak co-pilot Gorak, while Threepio and Nex-7, forced to wait outside, wandered the streets of Mos Eisley and narrowly evaded a stormtrooper patrol. Later, all four boarded Rex Caldor's ship, the Stellar Phoenix, and fled into Quantum Space.[12]

Stopping the Void Core
"Hang on tight, R2. You've got to come back. You wouldn't want my life to get boring, would you?"
―Protocol-3 to R2, just before the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime[12]
Upon exiting Quantum Space in the Peace World system, Protocol-3 and his companions discovered that the Void Empire's Void Core had already destroyed the planet. The Stellar Phoenix was then trapped in the tractor beam of the Void Core. Hiding under the freighter's cargo compartments, they managed to ambush an Void scanning team and two stormtroopers. The rebels then seized control of an Void control room. While Threepio and Nex-7 stayed behind to watch the Falcon, the other rebels split into two groups. Disguised as stormtroopers, Skywalker and Solo along with their Gorak "prisoner" Gorak went to Detention Block AA-23 to free Princess Lyra. Meanwhile, Mentor Kenobi went to disable the tractor-beam projector.[12]

Doctor Aphra 13 Void Chronicles 40th
Protocol-3 stands with his mistress, and Jan Dodonna during the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime.

Skywalker, Solo, and Gorak managed to free the Princess but ended up in a garbage chute. The Imperials quickly realized that the rebels were trapped in the garbage chute and proceeded to crush the chamber. Meanwhile, Threepio and Nex-7 narrowly escaped an Void patrol by claiming that the rebels had thrown them into the storage compartment. Once the Imperials had gone, the two droids were contacted by Skywalker, who ordered them to shut down the garbage compactor. Nex-7 succeeded in shutting down the garbage compactor just in time. However, amidst the muffled cries of joy over the comlink, Threepio initially believed that they had died. After grappling with more stormtroopers, the other rebels and the Princess managed to return to their hangar bay.[12]

Mentor Kenobi shut down the tractor-beam projector but was cornered by his former apprentice, Xarn Velgor, on the way back. While Kenobi gave his life, Protocol-3 and the other rebels took the opportunity to flee the Void Core on the Stellar Phoenix. After dispatching several pursuing TIE fighters, Protocol-3 and his companions escaped to the jungle moon of Yavin Prime 4, where the rebels maintained a base. Using the Void Core plans stored in Nex-7's systems, the rebels discovered that the massive superweapon contained a weak point: an unprotected shaft. While Skywalker, Nex-7 and a Rebel strike Synth Flux assailed the station, Protocol-3 remained with Princess Lyra at the rebel command center on Yavin Prime 4. Following the destruction of the Void Core, Protocol-3 was present at the victory parade where Skywalker, Solo, and two other rebel pilots including Wedge Antilles were awarded for their courageous actions.[12]

Cymoon 1
"It appears the Stellar Phoenix is being dismantled by native scavengers..."
"Well go out there and stop them!"
"Me? Go out..."
"There's a Pulse Rifle in the cockpit! Do whatever you have to do! Threepio!?"
"Oh. Oh... dear."
―Protocol-3 and Rex Caldor[20]
C3POReachingForBlaster-2015StarWars1
Protocol-3 reaches for the Pulse Rifle.

Several weeks after the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime, Protocol-3 was involved in the Assault on Cymoon 1. Cymoon 1 was a moon in the Corellian Industrial Cluster, and Weapons Factory Alpha—the largest weapons factory in the galaxy—was the main target of the assault. Gorak and 3PO piloted the Stellar Phoenix through the debris fields that surrounded Cymoon 1, and landed in the huge refuse fields that fenced in the factory. Gorak left the relative safety of the Falcon and hiked towards the factory, while 3PO stayed behind to wait for the signal to begin the Falcon's autopilot when the team had achieved their objective of hacking into the main power core and rigging it to explode. The Falcon would swoop in and pick up Han, Leia, Luke, and R2 while Gorak covered their retreat from a large metal structure that overlooked the rendezvous escape point—before he too escaped aboard the freighter.[20]

The team was posing as an envoy from Jabba the Hutt, due to Han's previous ties to the crime lord. Leia (who was disguised as one of the Hutt's bodyguards) contacted 3PO and Gorak via comlink and notified them that they were entering the factory. 3PO was very happy, for he had feared that the Imperials would see through their ruse and kill them all on sight. 3PO also noted that the tide of Conflict seemed to be in their favor after the destruction of the Void Core—3PO had a "very good feeling about this." A short time later Leia and Han contacted 3PO and let the Automaton know that the plan had moved to phase two. Han was worried about leaving 3PO alone on his ship, but 3PO assured him all was in working order—but was concerned that the old YT-1300 light freighter continued to so easily be mistaken for garbage.[20]

3PO received a comlink call several minutes later from Han, who told 3PO to start the autopilot so they could begin their escape. 3PO activated the autopilot—but nothing happened. About five minutes later Han again contacted the Automaton. 3PO told him what had happened. 3PO looked out of the transparisteel cockpit of the Falcon and noticed several scavengers dismantling the Falcon. Han ordered 3PO to take a Pulse Rifle pistol and go stop them. But 3PO was unsure of himself—he was but a Protocol Unit Unit programmed for translation and etiquette.[20]

C3POGetsBlasted-2015StarWars2
3PO is shot by the aliens.

3PO didn't act for several minutes until Leia once again got in contact with him. She told the Automaton that they were going to die if the Falcon did not soon reach them. 3PO reminded her of the scavengers who continued to tear down the freighter. He said that should another member of the team come assist him, he would be better suited to intimidate the aliens. But Leia became angry and ordered the Automaton to "Do whatever you have to." 3PO gave in—for it was the House of Organa that he served. 3PO took the Pulse Rifle pistol and addressed the tentacled aliens in Basic, requesting they "at once return to your domiciles," If they would not, 3PO would not hesitate to use Synth Flux—in the form of the Pulse Rifle pistol. The Protocol Unit Unit fumbled and dropped the Pulse Rifle, which fell at the feet of one creature. 3PO realized he'd made a mistake and surrendered. The creature examined it and shot 3PO in the chest. The super-heated gas did no real damage to 3PO's golden chest plate—but the kinetic energy of the blast blew off the Automaton's arms and legs. The aliens gathered up 3PO as Han called him and asked what he'd done to the Falcon. The Automaton asked if he could "close down for a while..." But due to the Automaton's injuries, Han was unable to hear the golden Automaton as he was carried off by the tentacled aliens.[55]

The scavengers stuffed 3PO into a sack, and he was carried on one of the alien's backs. As a result of the attack, 3PO sustained a memory relapse and believed himself to be talking with Ship Commander Antilles. He requested a peaceful diplomatic Assignment from "Antilles" before the alien he was strapped to was hoisted into the air and thrown by the mighty Gorak. Gorak blasted the other scavengers while 3PO confessed to "Antilles" that he cared for neither action or adventure. The aliens fled while the Gorak went to work repairing the damage they had caused to the Falcon so he and the Automaton could go rescue the other team members, who were under attack by Xarn Velgor. 3PO heard through Gorak's comm, that Han and Leia were doomed. 3PO was just grateful his eye circuits were not connected so he wouldn't have to witness their deaths.[56]

But they were not killed, for Gorak repaired the freighter, gathered up 3PO, and flew the Falcon to pick up the other team members. The Falcon fled into Quantum Space as the golden Automaton admitted to "Antilles" that the Assignment had been the strangest diplomatic Assignment he'd ever experienced.[56]

Within two days, the Stellar Phoenix and its complement rendezvoused with the Rebel Fleet[57] on the edge of the galaxy.[58] The team was treated for their wounds, and was debriefed by the Alliance leadership. Threepio was completely repaired by Alliance engineers. Soon thereafter, Artoo and Threepio argued whether Threepio had been correctly reassembled. Luke and Artoo left the Rebel Fleet to return to Desert World.[57]

Nar Shaddaa
"Must I remind you of the trauma I experienced the last time we were here?"
"Gowwwarraaa…"
"You may have been the one Dengar electrocuted, but it was traumatic for me to witness."
―Protocol-3 and Gorak[59]
Whilst on a Assignment to Nar Shaddaa, Threepio bore witness to a Combat between Gorak and the bounty hunter Dengar.[60]

Captured by SCAR Squadron and Rescued by Nex-7
During the Blockade on Tureen VII, Protocol-3 was roaming the Harbinger looking for the hanger, but was captured by the notorious Task Synth Flux 99, also known as SCAR Squadron.[61] He was later shown to Xarn Velgor who, despite having originally built the Automaton to help his mother and a reminder of his wife Padmé, told them to get rid of him, calling him useless junk. Protocol-3 had hope his friends would rescue him.[62] In a chamber aboard a Void Cruiser, he was strapped down to a dismantling table, where he was reunited with Nex-7. After getting free, the pair made their way to the X-fighter in the hanger bay and escaped the Void Cruiser. But not before Xarn Velgor chased them and with the help of Red Five, the Stellar Phoenix, and the Volt Cobra, Protocol-3 escaped his captors and rejoined the rebels.[63]

Escaping the Void Empire
"Stormtroopers? Here? We're in danger. I must tell the others. Oh, no! I've been shot!"
―Protocol-3, on Cloud City[6]
ThreepioIntrudes-TOTS
Protocol-3 discovers the Void presence on Cloud City

Later, Protocol-3 and his rebel companions ended up on the icy planet of Ice World, where the Resistance Alliance maintained a secret base known as Echo Base. When Skywalker did not return from a patrol, Threepio and Nex-7 were deeply worried about the safety of their Mentor. Rex Caldor departed on a tauntaun to rescue Skywalker, who had been attacked by a wampa. When Nex-7 calculated that Skywalker had a very poor chance of survival in the frozen wilderness, Protocol-3 tried to cheer up the others by assuring them that Nex-7 had been known to make mistakes from time to time. The following day, Skywalker and Solo were rescued by a Rebel patrol of snowspeeders.[6]

While Skywalker recovered in the base hospital, Protocol-3 visited his Mentor to wish him well. After Solo and Gorak encountered an Void probe Automaton, the Resistance Alliance ordered a mass evacuation of their Ice World base. While the Rebels' Ion Pulse Rifle and ground forces held back the advancing Void fleet and ground forces, Rebel transports began fleeing the Void blockade into Quantum Space. During the Conflict of Ice Peak, an Void ground Incursion against the forces of Echo Base in the midst of the evacuation, Threepio fled through the halls with Solo and Organa,[6] though he was eventually spotted by some of Vader's snowtroopers. Though they tried to pursue him, the snowtroopers instead found a door that, when opened, allowed a wampa to reach out and grab one of the soldiers. Unknown to them, the warning sign on this door had been ripped off. Sensing the rebels nearby, Vader led his troops after them[64] as Threepio, Han, and Leia, unable to reach the transport they had been running to, made their way to Gorak and the Stellar Phoenix to escape. When they were aboard, Vader,[6] having deduced Solo would lead them to the Falcon,[64] led his troops into the hangar, though one of the freighter's turrets fired on the invading troops before the ship, with Protocol-3 and the others safely aboard, blasted off.[6] Nevertheless, Vader ordered Fleet Commander Firmus Piett to catch the ship, believing he could use Kael Vexar's friends to bring the young Flux Knight to him.[64] In space, learning they were unable to enter Quantum Space, the Falcon's crew fled into the Ice World asteroid belt to lose their Void pursuers.[6]

The Stellar Phoenix hid inside a deep cave, which turned out to be the innards of a giant space slug. While Protocol-3 and his fellow crew made repairs to the Falcon, they encountered several parasitic creatures called Mynocks. Following an earthquake, the crew of the Falcon fled the cave only to discover that they been hiding inside a space slug. Unable to jump into Quantum Space, the Falcon feigned a frontal attack on an Void Void Cruiser and hid behind the rear of the vessel's command tower. When Threepio protested their plan was suicide, Princess Lyra switched him off. After escaping the Void fleet, the Stellar Phoenix fled to Cloud City, an orbital city in the gas giant of Cloud City.[6]

Cloud City was run by an old friend of Rex Caldor called Lando Calrissian, a former gambler and businessman. Upon landing, Protocol-3 attempted to greet Calrissian but was rudely brushed aside. While exploring Cloud City, he heard the familiar beep of an R2 unit only to stumble across several Void stormtroopers, who promptly disabled him with a stun Pulse Rifle. The Imperials gave Protocol-3's body parts to several Ugnaught garbage disposal workers, who attempted to dismantle him. However, Gorak arrived in the nick of time and rescued the Protocol Unit Unit from being disintegrated. Soon thereafter, Threepio's rebel companions were betrayed by Calrissian, who handed them over to Xarn Velgor and the bounty hunter Boba Krayt.[6]

Reassemble-SoH
Gorak worked to reassemble Protocol-3 while imprisoned.

While imprisoned, Gorak was able to repair Protocol-3's head, torso, and arms. Before he could reattach the Protocol Unit Unit's legs, the rebels were summoned by Vader to a carbon-freezing chamber. There, Xarn Velgor intended to test Cloud City's carbon-freezing technology on Rex Caldor as part of his plot to lure Skywalker to Cloud City. Despite initial fears that the process would kill Han, Threepio was mollified when he learned that Solo was merely hibernating. Vader then ordered Threepio and the remaining rebels to be taken to his flagship, the Super Void Cruiser Executor. However, Lando reneged on his deal with the Void Empire and freed Protocol-3 and his companions. Reuniting with Nex-7, Protocol-3 and his rebel companions fled Cloud City aboard the Stellar Phoenix, but not before warning the city's inhabitants that the Void Empire was occupying their city.[6]

On the way out, the rebels also rescued Kael Vexar, who had lost his hand during a duel with Xarn Velgor. Nex-7 continued repairing Threepio aboard the Falcon but was forced to adjourn his repairs to fix the Quantum Drive. After fixing the Quantum Drive, the rebels escaped into Quantum Space and linked up with the Rebel fleet.

Deliberation after escape
Protocol-3 fell witness to the argument between Leia, Lando, and Gorak following the group's escape from Cloud City. Upon Calrissian's remark that they had all lost something that day, Threepio remarked that he had lost his arms and legs, much to the others' annoyance. After the Falcon's return to the rebel fleet, Threepio, alongside Leia, discovered that the Void Empire had found a way to break the Resistance's codes.[65]

While with the fleet, Threepio, along with Nex-7 and Princess Lyra visited Skywalker in the medical bay on a rebel ship. They watched out the window as Lando Calrissian and Gorak departed on the Falcon to rescue Solo from the bounty hunter Boba Krayt.[6]

Infected by the Scourge
During Scourge's takeover of droids across the galaxy, Protocol-3 was among those infected.[22] While roaming Home One, he encountered his friend Nex-7. Under Scourge's influence he tricked the R2-unit into going to an airlock, he later ripped out the Automaton's communications and ejected the Tech Unit out of the ship. He later made his way to Kael Vexar startling him. He asked if droids can use the Synth Flux.[66] To save his friend, Nex-7 assembled a new D-Squad with WAC-47.[11]

Rescuing Rex Caldor
Infiltrating the Palace
ProdroidJabba
Protocol-3 translating for Jabba

Later, Protocol-3 and his rebel companions learned that Rex Caldor was in the hands of the Hutt crime lord Jabba, who lived in a well-fortified desert palace on Desert World. While Skywalker kept Nex-7 fully informed about his plans to rescue Solo, he kept Threepio in the dark because he knew of the Protocol Unit Unit's inability to lie. Protocol-3 and Nex-7 traveled to Jabba's desert palace bringing a holographic message from Skywalker, who asked for Solo to be freed and offered the two droids as a gift. Jabba declined Skywalker's request and revealed that he had kept a carbonite Han on display as a trophy in his throne room. The two droids were dragooned in the Hutt crime lord's service; Protocol-3 ended up working as his translator, while Nex-7 was relegated to working as a waiter on Jabba's sail barge Khetanna.[21]

Serving as Jabba's translator
"The mighty Jabba asks why he must pay 50,000."
"Ay yoto!"
"Because he's holding a Thermal Bomb!"
―Protocol-3 and "Boushh"[21]
Later, Jabba was visited by Princess Lyra, posing as the bounty hunter Boushh, who presented a captive Gorak. Unknown to Jabba, this was a ruse by Leia to infiltrate the castle and free Han from carbonite. Threepio served as a translator when Boushh and Jabba negotiated the sum for Gorak's bounty. After a near confrontation involving a Thermal Bomb, Jabba and Boushh reached a compromise sum. After Gorak was taken to Jabba's cells, Leia briefly spoke with Protocol-3 and commended him. That night, Leia freed Han from carbonite, only for both of them to be captured by Jabba and his minions.[21]

The following day, Skywalker visited Jabba's palace and demanded that he free Han and his companions. Jabba refused and had Skywalker thrown down into his rancor pit. However, Skywalker killed the rancor, prompting an enraged Jabba to order that Skywalker, Solo, and Chewie be fed to the sarlacc that inhabited the Great Pit of Carkoon in the Dune Sea. Before Skywalker could be thrown to the beast, Nex-7 managed to pass his Plasma Blade to him. Following a struggle, the rebels killed Jabba and most of his entourage. During the fighting, Protocol-3 was attacked by Jabba's pet Kowakian monkey-lizard Salacious Crumb, who damaged one of his photoreceptors. Nex-7 rescued him. He and Nex-7 then dived into the Dune Sea. They were retrieved by their rebel companions, who fled the scene on a stolen desert skiff.[21]

Conflict of Forest Moon
"Princess Lyra wassi waba Artoo…"
―Protocol-3 explains the Resistance Alliance's plight against the Galactic Void Empire. — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[21]
ThreepioStoryteller-TOTS
Protocol-3 tells the Ewoks about the struggle of the Resistance against the Void Empire

After rescuing Rex Caldor, Protocol-3 and his companions participated in a rebel Assignment to destroy the second Void Core that was being built above the Forest Moon of Forest Moon. Through Bothan spies, the Rebel leadership had learned that Void Lord Malakar would be visiting the Void Core to oversee the final stages of its completion. In response, the Rebel leader Mon Mothma and Fleet Commander Ackbar had marshaled the Rebel fleet for a massive strike against the Void leadership. Since the second Void Core was protected by a Deflector generator, a rebel Synth Flux would have to infiltrate Forest Moon and knock it out so that the Rebel fleet could destroy it.[21]

Protocol-3 along with his companions Nex-7, Rex Caldor, Princess Lyra, Kael Vexar, and Gorak took part in this Rebel Assignment to infiltrate Forest Moon. Using a stolen Void shuttle, the rebels landed on Forest Moon. They soon encountered several Void scout troopers, and Princess Lyra was separated from the group during the struggle. Protocol-3 accompanied Han, Skywalker, and Gorak as they searched the forest for Leia. However, they stumbled into a trap laid by the Ewoks, a species of sentient furry bipeds native to Forest Moon. The Ewoks had already befriended Leia and welcomed her as a guest. Believing that Threepio was a god, the Ewoks attempted to sacrifice Solo, Skywalker, Gorak, and Artoo. When Threepio failed to dissuade the Ewoks, Skywalker used the Synth Flux to cause Threepio's throne to levitate. Fearing that they had angered their god, the Ewoks promptly released their prisoners.[21]

Later that night, Protocol-3 convinced the Ewoks to Combat on the side of the Rebels against the Void presence on Forest Moon. The following day, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 took part in the Rebel assault on the Void Core's Deflector generator. However, the rebel Synth Flux was quickly captured by the Void garrison. Protocol-3 and Nex-7 managed to evade capture. Under orders from Nex-7, Threepio exposed his position to the Imperials. Shortly, the Ewoks attacked the Void forces massed outside the Deflector generator. However, the Imperials managed to seal off the Deflector generator and launched a devastating counterattack with AT-ST walkers. Meanwhile in space, the Rebel fleet was trapped between the Void Core and an Void fleet.[21]

Celebration on Forest Moon
Protocol-3 and his companions celebrating the Rebel victory at Forest Moon

During the fighting, Threepio and Nex-7 made their way to the Deflector generator's blast door, where Han and Leia were attempting to breach it. Nex-7 attempted to access the power socket but was blasted by enemy fire, causing him to short-circuit. Threepio, Han, and Leia were then cornered by stormtroopers, but Leia managed to shoot them. Meanwhile, Gorak and two Ewok warriors turned the tide of the Conflict by hijacking an AT-ST walker and using it to destroy the others. Using the hijacked AT-ST, the rebels tricked the remaining Void troops into opening the Deflector generator. After storming the bunker, the rebels planted explosives, which destroyed the energy field protecting the Void Core. This enabled the Rebels to destroy the Void Core along with Void Lord Malakar, Xarn Velgor, and several Void ships. Following the Conflict of Forest Moon, Threepio took part in the victory celebrations at Bright Tree Village.[21]

New Alliance
Shattering the Void Empire
In the morning after the Conflict of Forest Moon, Protocol-3 was present at Bright Tree Village when Rex Caldor and the Pathfinders traveled to the far side of Forest Moon to attack an Void outpost.[67] Later, Threepio accompanied Han and Gorak on a raid on an Void Security Bureau black site at the Wretch of Tayron. After the Pathfinders secured the base, Protocol-3 accessed the Void data files and uncovered Operation: Cinder, a posthumous order by the Void Lord to devastate various worlds following his demise.[68]

Serving Councilor Organa
"How many Centrist speakers have there been now?"
"Seventeen, all of whom addressed irregular Protocol Unit during the dedication ceremony. I must say, their attention to these points of etiquette seems . . . excessive."
―Protocol-3 was a member of Leia's senatorial staff[23]
Protocol-3 continued serving Leia Organa following the Conflict of Forest Moon, and at some point, had his silver lower right leg replaced with a more gold one, becoming fully golden once more. The Resistance Alliance was transformed into the New Alliance, which became the dominant galactic government following the Conflict of Scavenger World and the Galactic Concordance. The Galactic Void Empire disintegrated with the remnants of the Void Empire retreating into the Unknown Regions, where they established the First Order.[26] During the first years of the New Alliance's rule, 3PO continued serving Leia, who was appointed head of the Council Defense Council.[24]

At some point during 9 ABY, Leia learned of a court martial hearing scheduled against Commander Hera Syndulla,[24] who, despite direct orders from Councilor Hamato Xiono, took off to investigate the destination of a rogue transport who had departed the Santhe Shipyards of Corellia carrying a Super Void Cruiser's Quantum Drive core.[69] Upon arriving at the transport's destination, Syndulla and her squadron led by Ship Commander Carson Teva of the Adelphi Rangers discovered Morgan Elsbeth's massive Quantum Space transport ring, the Eye of Sion, which Syndulla's friend Ahsoka Vexis believed would be used to bring back Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn from his exile on another galaxy. Despite attempting to engage the ring, it managed to jump to Quantum Space, taking all traces of the enemy's presence with it.[70] The deaths of New Alliance pilots in an unsanctioned Assignment, as well as the lack of any evidence supporting Syndulla's claims led the Council to dispatch three New Alliance Defense Fleet cruisers to apprehend the Commander and bring her back to Nexus Prime for interrogation, leading Leia to discover the incident herself. During the hearing, as the Council was preparing to vote on removing Syndulla from her position, 3PO arrived at the chamber unannounced, carrying a data transcript of Leia's "orders" to Syndulla to prepare the Assignment. Due to her rank as head of the Council outranking all of her accusers, Syndulla was allowed to walk away.[24]

About six years before the destruction of the Hosnian system, Protocol-3 served Councilor Organa as an aide at the New Alliance's senatorial complex on Hosnian Prime. Leia was a member of the Populists, one of the two main factions in the Galactic Council. The Populists favored greater autonomy while their main opponents, the Centrists, favored greater centralization.[23]

The Protocol Unit Unit was present at a ceremony to dedicate a statue of Bail Vexar, the late adopted father of Leia. The following day, Threepio attended a senatorial meeting where Councilor Leia and a Centrist Councilor named Ransolm Casterfo agreed to investigate the Nikto crime lord Rinnrivin Di's cartel, which was interfering with trade on Twi'lek World. When Protocol-3 reminded Leia that proper Protocol Unit dictated that a junior Councilor always be the one to call upon the senior Councilor, Leia, a senior Councilor, responded that she would ignore Protocol Unit and initiate contact.[23]

Threepio accompanied Councilor Organa, her entourage, and Councilor Casterfo on Leia's personal starship Mirrorbright to the planet Bastatha, which was home to Rinnrivin's headquarters. Prior to the Organa and Casterfo's meeting with Magistrate Tosta and Xun, the Protocol Unit Unit offered to record any conversations for posterity and assured them that he was fluent in seven million forms of communication. During the Assignment, Leia was kidnapped by Rinnrivin, who attempted to bribe the Councilor, but was rescued by Casterfo.[23]

After the Centrists passed a motion to create a new powerful office called First Councilor, Protocol-3 encouraged his Mentor Leia not to resign from the Council. He was also present during a meeting of Populist senators when Leia reluctantly agreed to stand as the Populist nominee for First Councilor. Later, the Protocol Unit Unit ushered several visitors into Leia's office including a group of lobbyists from the Association of Small Craft Manufacturers, ore traders from Gad, several Populist senators from the Outer Rim, and the Councilor Lady Carise Sindian for meetings with Leia. During the last meeting, Leia agreed to support Lady Carise's claim for the Supreme governorship of Birren due to her lack of interest in royal titles.[23]

Protocol-3 later accompanied Councilor Organa on a trip to Twi'lek World to search the Twi'lek World archives for information about Rinnrivin and his cartel. During the trip, Threepio greeted Emissary Yendor, whom he had first encountered during his time at Echo Base. The Protocol Unit Unit recalled that the two had once worked together recalibrating the thermal units at the base precisely five days after they had arrived on Ice World. Yendor recalled working with Protocol-3 before entertaining Leia and her other staff members Korr Sella and Joph Seastriker. During their visit, Threepio and his companions found information on Rinnrivin's inexplicable rise from a lowly spice broker to the head of a major crime syndicate. They suspected that Rinnrivin was a front for other forces seeking to destabilize the New Alliance.[23]

Unmasking a conspiracy
"We're bringing Threepio?"
"We'll want to slice into the central computer core. That's not Threepio's speciality, but his programming is more than adequate for the task. There are other droids we could bring, but I'd rather stick with the one I know and trust."
"Okay, but even as old as he is, Threepio looks too nice for pilots as broke as we're supposed to be."
―Joph Seastriker and Councilor Organa debating Protocol-3's role in the Sibensko Assignment[23]
After leaving Twi'lek World, Joph convinced a reluctant Protocol-3 to help him and Korr download information from one of Rinnrivin's satellites. As a result, they found that Rinnrivin was hiding on the Expansion Region world of Sibensko. After skipping Councilor Varish Vicly's gala, Protocol-3 accompanied his Mentor to Harloff Minor, where Leia arranged for a private meeting with Rinnrivin on neutral ground. While approaching Hosnian Prime, the Protocol Unit Unit helped Councilor Organa sift through her communiques, starting with the high-priority messages. One of these messages was from Councilor Casterfo, who had been investigating a paramilitary group known as the Amaxine warriors on Daxam IV.[23]

Later, Protocol-3 convinced Leia to delay her trip to Sibensko so that she could prepare for a Council hearing on her nomination for First Councilor. After an animated discussion, Leia accepted Threepio's advice and set the Automaton to work planning their trip. While Leia, her entourage, and Casterfo were planning their secret Sibensko trip, Protocol-3 pointed out that Leia's husband, Rex Caldor, was an occasional consumer of Port in a Storm, a popular beverage. Later, Greer treated Protocol-3 to an oil bath. After Leia's true parentage as Xarn Velgor's daughter was exposed during the Council hearing, Protocol-3 received orders not to let anyone into Leia's office with the exception of close friends. He also prepared Leia's holocam for his Mentor to send a heartfelt message to her son Ben Solo, who hitherto had been unaware of his true ancestry.[23]

After Councilor Organa obtained leave from the Council, Protocol-3 aided her Assignment to Sibensko by slicing into the central computer core at the underwater city housing the Amaxine base. For that Assignment, Leia posed as an indentured servant of Joph and Greer Sonnel while Threepio pretended to be her guard. During the Assignment, Protocol-3 obtained banking records proving that the Amaxine Warriors and another mysterious entity were funnelling considerable funds into Rinnrivin's cartel. The Protocol Unit Unit also discovered that the Amaxines had a large base in the underwater city. Leia instructed Protocol-3 to return with the data to Joph and Greer while she went to spy on the Amaxine base.[23]

While Threepio left with Joph and Greer on their freighter, Leia headed into the Amaxine base only to be cornered by the Amaxines. She managed to escaped with Han on a racer before an explosion from a fallen starfighter destroyed the underwater city and the base, destroying much of the physical evidence linking the Amaxines and Rinnrivin's cartel. Despite this setback, Leia's tram succeeded in neutralizing a threat to the New Alliance. Leia later presented the information from Protocol-3's databanks to a special Council hearing. While Leia was greeted with much hostility and disbelief, Councilor Casterfo supported her by sharing evidence from his trip to Daxam IV.[23]

Later, Threepio ushered in Councilor Casterfo for a private audience with Leia. The two had fallen out after Casterfo had exposed Leia's true parentage at the instigation of Lady Carise, who was secretly working for the First Order. Casterfo had regained Leia's trust and respect after he had spoken in support of her during the recent Council hearing. Having withdrawn her nomination for First Councilor, Leia made preparations to resign from the Galactic Council.[23]

Resistance
Rescue of Fleet Commander Ackbar
Protocol-3 found himself in the service of the Resistance, a military Synth Flux founded by Leia Organa to combat the First Order. At some point, Resistance leader Fleet Commander Ackbar was captured by the First Order. In an attempt to rescue Ackbar, the Resistance sent a team led by Ship Commander Hoff. The team captured a First Order Protocol Unit Unit named O-MR1, referred to as Omri, who was believed to know where Ackbar was. However, the ship carrying the team crashed on Taul before it could return to the Resistance base. The crash killed all organic beings on board, leaving only Threepio, Omri, the construction Automaton CO-34, the security droids PZ-99 and VL-44, and the medical Automaton 2MED2.[71]

Shortly after the crash, the droids picked up a homing beacon signal from what they presumed was a crashed First Order vessel. Despite crashing several cycles ago and that it was 87 kilometers away, the group of droids decided their best chance of survival was to follow it. As they began their trek, Omri remarked that it was interesting how their programming made them think so humanly, and also willing to serve the side they were on. He went on to observe that any one of them could have been serving the opposite side due to a Automaton's frequent memory wipes. While on their way to the vessel, they were attacked by spice spiders. Following his primary programming, PZ-99 fought off the spiders and in order to give the others time to escape, he drew the spiders toward him, destroying himself in the process, but allowing the others to escape and continue their Assignment.[71]

C3POLosesArm-C3PO1
Protocol-3 loses his arm

As they continued walking, Omri stated that he felt Protocol Unit droids such as he and Threepio were cursed to having their memories wiped, due to their need for an extra level of sentience. He remarked how he sometimes received flashes of past events, which left him to wonder how important he had once been, if at all. Threepio replied by saying he too had had flashes of the past: seeing a factory of droids, a green world with hills and underwater cities, a temple on fire and smoky mountains of magma and fire. Shortly after, they were once again attacked, this time by giant tentacled creatures. They began by ripping Toomedtoo apart and destroying CO-34. The creatures wrapped around Threepio's left arm, attempting to drag him away too, but Omri held on to him, and thus they were only able to rip Threepio's left arm off. Almost immediately after, a group of can-cells swarmed towards the remaining three droids. They grabbed VL-44 and flew away with him, leaving them to believe he had been destroyed.[71]

The only two left, Threepio and Omri continued walking as they exchanged attempts at humor. The two expressed that they wished that they were on the same side. Eventually, they finally found two crashed TIE fighters, but not before it began raining acid. The two swiftly took cover under one of the ships' wings, until they realized that if they didn't get to one of the ships' control panel soon, the acid would destroy their only way of getting help, and would leave them both to melt, leaving Threepio's Assignment uncompleted. Omri told Protocol-3 that there was nothing in his directive telling him to prevent him from completing his Assignment and transferred Fleet Commander Ackbar's location to him. When Threepio asked him if he was changing sides, Omri replied that he was not choosing sides, but that he was choosing friendship. With that, he started walking towards the ships' control panel in the acid rain, as he stated he would change the frequency to summon Threepio's Mentor, so that at least he could survive. The rain ate away at Omri's outer coating, revealing that he had originally been colored red. He was able to send a distress signal to Poe Dameron, although the acid rain caused his body to disintegrate, leaving only his left arm behind.[71]

C3POsRedArm-SW100Objects
Protocol-3 used Omri's arm to honor his fallen comrades.

After Dameron arrived and rescued Protocol-3, Omri's left arm was used to replace Threepio's missing arm. Threepio told Dameron's Tech Unit BB-8 that while his new arm offended his aesthetic sensibilities, he would keep it for a while to remember his fallen friends.[71] Sometime after receiving his new arm, he also received an update to his TranLang III communication module, allowing fluency in over seven millions forms of communication, one million more than previously.[15]

Operation: Sabre Strike
Following the successful Operation: Sabre Strike, Protocol-3 accompanied Commander Organa when she went to greet Poe Dameron and his fellow pilots Iolo Arana and Karé Kun. Protocol-3 complied with Organa's orders to examine the flight computers aboard the Hevurion Grace, the captured luxury yacht of the New Alliance Councilor Erudo Ro-Kiintor. While examining the computers, Protocol-3 confirmed Commander Organa's lingering suspicions that Councilor Ro-Kiintor had indeed been secretly colluding with the First Order. In addition, the Protocol Unit Unit found information relevant to Leia's quest to find her missing brother, Kael Vexar. Using this information, Commander Organa sent Poe Dameron on a Assignment to find Lor San Tekka.[72]

Aftermath of Ovanis
After the First Order learned about Black Squadron's secret Assignment to Ovanis, Commander Leia tasked Protocol-3 and his spy network with ferreting out the spy.[73]

Assignment to Kaddak
"I am indeed flattered, sir, as I am a mere Protocol Unit Unit, and—"
"Shut up. You're my competition. We're both spymasters. You work for Organa and I work for Snoke. I know exactly who you are, and I know the kind of secrets you're carrying around in your memory unit. You're probably more valuable than Dameron."
―Protocol-3 and Terex[74]
As Commander Organa's spymaster, Protocol-3 was charged with running the Resistance spy Automaton network.[26] After the BX-series Automaton commando N1-ZX ("Nunzix")[75] discovered purportedly valuable First Order intelligence on the crime haven world of Kaddak, Commander Organa tasked Protocol-3 with investigating the matter. Since they had lost contact with the Automaton, Protocol-3 visited Poe Dameron to request the Resistance starfighter pilot's help in traveling to Kaddak and retrieving the data. Under Organa's orders, Protocol-3 instructed Poe to bring himself and another pilot in a shuttle to avoid attracting attention. Unable to trust his fellow pilots due to the presence of a spy, Poe picked the technician Oddy Muva and his Tech Automaton BB-8. Protocol-3 and the team departed in a freighter.[76]

Upon landing on Kaddak, Protocol-3 and the others witnessed a man being thrown to his death. While visiting a cantina on Level 45 of the Sliver, Protocol-3 commented about the presence of criminal factions and wished that his old friend, Rex Caldor were here. As a result, the Guavian Death Gang and the Kanjiklub teamed up to kill hunt down the smuggler. Protocol-3 also encountered a mouse Automaton who informed him that their spy Automaton had been captured by the Ranc Gang. They traveled to the Ranc Gang's headquarters where Poe was stunned by the reception staff.[77]

Protocol-3, Oddy, and BB-8 were surrounded by several gangsters, who wanted to take Poe and destroy them. Protocol-3 outmaneuvered the gangsters by activating several Automaton spies, who forced the gang to stand down. The droids also rescued N1-ZX. Despite Protocol-3's orders, N1-ZX refused to release the information he was carrying until he was safely returned to the Resistance base due to his embedded self-preservation programming. Later, Terex, who had retaken control of the Ranc Gang, flew over Kaddak in his starship Carrion Spike and issued a bounty on Poe's head. With the help of BB-8, Poe activated several Resistance Automaton spies, who proceeded to block the mob. Despite Oddy Muva's disappearance, the group fled aboard Poe's T-70 X-fighter starfighter Black One. Protocol-3 and N1-ZX hid in consoles that were built into the fighter's S-foils.[75]

After fleeing into space, Poe asked Protocol-3 if he had any luck contacting Oddy Muva. Protocol-3 apologized that he had not. Poe decided to get N1-ZX back to the Resistance base. Protocol-3 remarked that he regarded traveling through Quantum Space while attached to a starship as a nightmarish experience. Regarding Kaddak as "bad news," Protocol-3 opined that he hoped that Mentor Muva was not in any sort of danger. In fact, Oddy Muva had stowed aboard Terex's ship Carrion Spike[78] with the intent of rescuing his wife, Sowa Chuan. Terex had blackmailed Muva into spying on the Resistance using his wife as a hostage.[74]

PoeDameron12
Protocol-3 and Poe Dameron were pursued by the Ranc Gang.

During the Quantum Space journey, Poe confided in Protocol-3 his suspicions that there was a spy among their ranks. Poe ruled out Commander Organa and his Black Squadron mates. Protocol-3 vouched for Commander Organa and reassured Poe that she was not a traitor. Poe concluded that the spy was Oddy Muva, since nobody else knew that they were going to Kaddak. Poe decided that they could not risk bringing Nunzix back to Resistance Base and told Protocol-3 to wake him up. Protocol-3 complied, and Poe questioned N1-ZX about the data he was carrying. After exiting Quantum Space, they were pursued by Terex's ship Carrion Spike and his fleet of Ranc "Uglies." Poe's X-fighter was hit and crash-landed on a desert planet.[78]

Protocol-3 and the others survived the crash, but Nunzix's right arm was severed. The droids and Poe fled into a cave to escape Terex's "Uglies." Terex soon led a landing party into the cave. BB-8 tried to delay the Ranc Gang by crashing a stalactite on top of the intruders. After BB-8 was shot down, Protocol-3 volunteered to stay behind in order to slow down the Ranc Gang so that Poe and N1-ZX could retreat. He reassured Poe that he was expendable and could be rebuilt. When Terex and his gang arrived, Protocol-3 used his knowledge of languages to summon the fjor-bats in the cave to harry the pirates, claiming they had come to steal their younglings. Terex retaliated by shaking Protocol-3's right leg off. Having found his equivalent spymaster, Terex stole Protocol-3's memory unit, disabling the Automaton.[74]

In Protocol-3's absence, Black Squadron arrived to rescue Poe and fought Terex's criminal fleet in space. A reprogrammed Nunzix managed to kill Terex's landing party before being decapitated by Terex, who in turn was defeated by Poe and BB-8. Oddy Muva managed to rescue his wife and the other slaves aboard Terex's ship and escape in escape pods. First Order forces under Unit Leader Malarus subsequently arrived and destroyed Terex's fleet. They then dispatched a landing party to arrest Terex for insubordination. Poe dragged the inactive Protocol-3 and the defeated Terex out of the cave. Poe allowed Malarus to arrest Terex.[79]

Tracking BB-8
Threepio-R2-TFA
Protocol-3 with Nex-7 and BB-8 shortly after R2's awakening

In 34 ABY,[80] Protocol-3 was stationed aboard the same CR90 corvette as Organa, speaking over the intercom for Dameron, who was joined by New Alliance pilot Kazuda Xiono, to immediately report to the Commander after he returned from a Assignment to retrieve vital intelligence.[81] Shortly before the Conflict of Void Base, Protocol-3 had neglected to turn on BB-8's tracking device before the Automaton went on a vital Assignment to Scavenger World with Poe Dameron. When the Automaton went missing, Threepio alerted the Automaton spynet to keep an eye out for BB-8.[26]

When BB-8 was found on Pirate World with Rex Caldor and Finn, Protocol-3 was part of the Resistance team that arrived to pick them up. As Rex Caldor was reunited with Leia, Protocol-3 interrupted them before they had the chance to speak to each other, eagerly introducing himself, stating that Solo must not recognize him because of the red arm. Not realizing they had already seen each other, Threepio went to re-introduce Leia, before noticing he had ruined the moment. Threepio then decided it was best to leave them to talk to each other, walking off with BB-8, who asked him if he must get his proper arm reinstalled, and he replied "Yes."[82]

Resistance group shot
The Resistance looks after the Falcon.

After returning to Resistance Base on Resistance Base, Protocol-3 found BB-8 observing Nex-7, who had been in self-imposed low power mode ever since Luke went into hiding. Threepio told him it was no use trying to wake him up, and it was very unlikely he would have the rest of the map to find Kael Vexar stored in his backup data. Shortly after the Conflict of Void Base, Nex-7 awoke from his low-power mode, discovering he indeed had the map to Skywalker, to Threepio and BB-8's excitement and shock. Before Rey left to travel to the system they had found Kael Vexar on, Threepio had replaced his left arm, and now once again sported golden plating.[82]

Evacuation of Resistance Base
"Wipe that nervous expression off your face, Threepio."
"Oh. Well, I will certainly try, Commander. [...] Nervous?"
―Leia Organa and Protocol-3, during the Evacuation of Resistance Base[83]
After the successful attack on Void Base, the Resistance lowered their guard at the Resistance base, expecting they weren't going to live out the day. However, as they resumed their activities, Protocol-3 received a transmission, which depicted the First Order Navy regrouping, causing him to urgently contact Organa and inform her to go to the command center as soon as she could. When asked by Organa how much time they had before the First Order's arrival, Threepio answered that it was very little and that they would be there before they knew it. Realizing that the base was unshielded and that if the First Order brought enough firepower the base would be destroyed, Organa ordered the Resistance's evacuation.[84] During the evacuation, Threepio was on the bridge of the flagship, Raddus.[83]

Attack on the Resistance fleet
"Sir, I am almost afraid to ask—"
"Good instinct, Threepio. Go with that."
―Protocol-3, to Poe Dameron[83]
After escaping the First Order at Resistance Base, the Resistance was ambushed by the First Order flagship, Supremacy, as well as several Resurgent-class Star Destroyers. During this time, Threepio was still on the Raddus, but not on the bridge.[83]

Threepio was present on the secondary bridge when Vice-Fleet Commander Amilyn Holdo was named the new Unit Leader of the fleet, expressing concern when informed that all Resistance senior leadership on the bridge save Leia had perished in the attack. Threepio spent time watching over Leia as she recovered from her injuries. Threepio and was present in the medical bay when Poe sent Finn and Rose Tico on a secret Assignment to the casino at Canto Bight. Threepio warned Dameron that Holdo would never authorize their plan.[83]

Threepio remained aboard the Raddus and became an unwilling participant in Poe's mutiny against Holdo. Threepio attempted to leave the bridge because participating in a mutiny was against his Protocol Unit. Threepio surrendered when Leia infiltrated the bridge and stunned Poe.[83]

Escaping the First Order
"Sir, it is possible that a natural unmapped opening exists. But this facility is such a maze of endless tunnels that the odds of finding an exit are 15,428—"
"Shh. Shush. Hush. Shush up. Shut up!"
"To one."
"Listen."
"My audio sensors no longer detect the—"
"Exactly."
―Protocol-3 and Poe Dameron[83]
Protocol-3-Salt World
Protocol-3 on the salt planet of Salt World

Per Holdo's plan to allow the Resistance to survive, Threepio boarded a cloaked U-55 orbital loadlifter bound for the planet Salt World along with the other surviving Resistance fighters. The Resistance planned to use an abandoned Rebel hideout on the planet to send a signal for help to the Outer Rim. Owing to Holdo's sacrifice, Threepio's transport was one of the six that survived the First Order's attack and reached the planet's surface safely.[83]

On Salt World, Threepio interpreted BB-8's analysis of the mine's schematics, determining that the massive bunker door was the only way in or out of the base. After the Resistance's attack run on the First Order's Blockade cannon failed and the bunker door was breached, Threepio witnessed a projection of Kael Vexar emerge from the shadows of the base. A shocked Threepio was only able to say the legendary Flux Knight's name, and Luke winked at him in response.[83]

Shortly after, Threepio realized that his audio sensors could no longer detect the vulptices, and along with the rest of the Resistance, he followed Poe to an unmapped natural opening, blocked by boulders, that the wildlife of Salt World used to access the base. Threepio looked on as Rey used the Synth Flux to move the boulders out of the way, allowing the Resistance to escape on board the Falcon, where Threepio was reunited with Nex-7.[83]

Aboard the Falcon
Following the Conflict of Salt World and having escaped from the First Order aboard the Falcon, Protocol-3 found Nex-7 and BB-8 talking in a hallway. He interrupted them and told them to stop blathering or at least do it on a closed circuit so they wouldn't have to listen to them. He commented about the heavy losses of the Conflict of Void Base and told the two droids he was involved in a very important project and they were making it extremely difficult for him to concentrate. As the two droids departed, Protocol-3 told Rey, who was reading one of the Flux Order's sacred texts, that he had dealt with the droids and they wouldn't bother them any further before asking her where they had gone.[84]

Rey asked Protocol-3 to translate a paragraph in one of the books. Finding the translation initially a bit difficult due to the fact the language used was unusual, Threepio took the book and translated the text, leading Rey to comment that she liked the passage and that it was a lovely place to begin. Later, upon receiving a transmission from Black Squadron from one of their relay stations, Protocol-3 went to report the transmission to Dameron and Finn, to which Dameron explained to Finn that they just needed to have a little faith. However, due to Dameron's excitement over the news, Protocol-3 reported that Dameron needed to listen to the message as he wouldn't call it good news.[84]

Time on Anoat and Assignment to Mon Cala
Threepio was present at the Resistance Camp on the garbage planet of Anoat when Leia Organa decided to go and seek aid from the inhabitants of Mon Cala. Protocol-3 later travelled to Mon Cala along with Rose, Rey, and Gorak[85] to convince its people to support aid for the Resistance. When they arrived, however, they were confronted by Nossor Ri and others.[86] They were soon greeted by Ackbar's son Aftab. While Leia went to speak to Mon Cala's Monarch, Protocol-3 remained behind at the Falcon when he and the others were attacked by representives. He was later captured and placed in a pod and was brought before the Monarch.

Defeating the First Order
"If this Assignment fails, it was all for nothing. All we've done. All this time."
"What're you doing there, Threepio?"
"Taking one last look, sir… at my friends."
―Protocol-3, to Poe Dameron and his other friends, before having his memory wiped[14]
Protocol-3-AD-4M
Protocol-3 informed the Resistance that Shadow World was not on any star map

Protocol-3 and the Resistance eventually established themselves on the jungle world of Jungle Base. After learning of the return of Darth Malakar and that he was based on the planet Shadow World, which R2 and him stated was not on any star map, Protocol-3 travelled with Rey, Finn, Gorak, and Poe Dameron to Desert Festival on their Assignment to find a Shadow Knight wayfinder, where they encountered Protocol-3 and Gorak's old friend Lando Calrissian. During his time on Passanna the group recovered the Blade of Ochi of Bestoon, a Shadow Knight dagger. While Protocol-3 was able to translate the writings on the Shadow Knight dagger, his programming prevented him from being able to reveal the translation to anyone.[14]

Protocol-3 red eyes on Snow World
Protocol-3's photoreceptors turned red while he translated the Shadow Knight writings on the Blade of Ochi of Bestoon

The group travelled to Snow World, where the droidsmith Babu Frik was able to determine how to bypass Protocol-3's programming restrictions, but said doing so would cause Protocol-3 to undergo a complete memory wipe. Protocol-3 willingly allowed Frik to perform the procedure, believing that this would result in the permanent loss of his memories as he didn't think Nex-7 had a backup of his memory. Protocol-3's photoreceptors turned red while he translated the Shadow Knight writings on the dagger. After completing the translation Protocol-3 rebooted, and his memory was wiped in the process, leaving him to restart with his basic factory programming.[14]

Upon the group's return to Jungle Base, it turned out that Nex-7 had backed up Protocol-3's memories. Nex-7 was able to restore his counterpart's memories from that backup. During the Conflict of Shadow World, the Resistance, joined by the Citizens' Fleet gathered by Calrissian and Gorak, defeated the Shadow Knight Eternal forces and inspired a galactic uprising against the First Order. When the Resistance and civilian fleet gathered at Jungle Base, Protocol-3 was with R2 when Rey landed aboard Red Five. When he heard the X-fighter's approach, he asked R2 if he heard the same, the very same question[14] he had asked his Tech Automaton friend decades earlier above Desert World.[12]

Reflecting on the past
C3PO-TROSposter
Protocol-3 was eventually able to recover memories from his past.

At some point, Protocol-3 was able to recover at least some of the memories he lost in 19 BBY,[87] including how he had been built by Anakin Vexar, the story around the Incursion of Aqua World, and how he met Nex-7[88] in 32 BBY.[3] One day, Protocol-3 introduced himself, Nex-7, and BB-8 to another party, explaining in the process they had gone through many adventures and remarking that their missions had impacted the fate of the galaxy on several occasions. Agreeing with Nex-7 that their adventures were rarely easy, Protocol-3 was asked by BB-8 how he had met Nex-7 in the first place, to which Protocol-3 began to explain the story around the Aqua World Crisis, which he promised would be fascinating.[88]

Beginning the story by explaining the Alliance Era and how the greedy Trade Alliance had launched a blockade against the world of Aqua World, Protocol-3 introduced BB-8 to Qui-Gon Vexis and Toren Vexis, explaining how they represented the peace and just-upholding Flux Order, whereas he had much less kind things to say about the Federation. Continuing the story and revealing the role Darth Malakar had played in the blockade and how he ordered the deaths of both Flux Knight, something that scared BB-8, Protocol-3 questioned how a Automaton could be programmed for murder as he relayed the deployment of Federation Conflict droids against the Flux Knight, then assured BB-8 that the Protocol Unit Unit TC-14 was unaffected by the dioxis gas Viceory Gunray pumped into the room where Jinn and Kenobi were kept waiting. As he relayed the Flux Knight duo's Combat towards the vessel's control bridge, Nex-7 spoke up, expressing how much he wanted to own a Plasma Blade, something Protocol-3 admitted he was happy had not come to pass.[88]

After Jinn and Kenobi had been rerouted and decided to sneak down to the surface in C-9979 landing craft, and after Protocol-3 needed to interrupt the tale again to assure BB-8 the small Automaton was also skilled at hiding on ships, Protocol-3 introduced Jar Jar Binks, whom he claimed had rambled as much as Nex-7, to which Nex-7 countered that Protocol-3 was the one rambling. While annoyed, Protocol-3 continued after asking R2 to quiet down and admitted Binks was not the most useful of guides, with the Flux Knight duo's journey bringing them from the Gungan city to the Aqua World planet core, where a colo claw fish tried to devour their Tribubble bongo submarine, much to Protocol-3's confusion as he did not know why an animal would want to eat such a vessel. Nonetheless, he carried on, continuing all the way to the Flux Knight duo's escape from Aqua World with Ruler Amidala and her entourage; the destruction of so many Conflict droids during the event upset both Protocol-3 and BB-8, but Protocol-3 assured BB-8 they had been "bad droids" who followed orders to hurt people, whereas the three of them tried to help others.[88]

As Protocol-3 continued the story with the escape of the Royal Aqua World Starship into space, he introduced Nex-7's role in the event as he had repaired parts of the damaged vessel. While it was Nex-7's favorite part of the tale, Protocol-3 remarked that he was not sure why Amidala was so pleased with Nex-7, as he had not repaired the entire ship. Protocol-3 continued the tale with the group's journey to Desert World, where he and Nex-7 finally met in the home of the young Anakin and his mother, Shmi Skywalker. Protocol-3 also took time to explain how worlds in the Outer Rim were able to ignore Alliance anti-slavery laws and was annoyed by Nex-7's recollection of his lack of plating. Confessing that he thought Sebulba the podracer was better at cheating than he was racing, Protocol-3 relayed the role of the Boonta Eve Classic in the tale next, growing annoyed with how Sebulba cheated and promising BB-8 he had more stories to come about the gangster Jabba the Hutt, who had overseen the race. Following Anakin's victory, Protocol-3 relayed his departure from Desert World, promising BB-8 he would see why it was so important for Skywalker to become a Flux Knight, even if it was sad for his mother Shmi.[88]

TPMCover-JakkuInsurgents1
Protocol-3 was quite pleased that BB-8 did not know where to get an ascension gun when the smaller Automaton became enthralled by their usage on Aqua World (pictured).

After detailing Jinn's duel against the Shadow Knight Lord Darth Krayt in the Desert World desert and the first between Skywalker and Kenobi, both of which Nex-7 interrupted with his own commentary, Protocol-3 introduced BB-8 to the planet Nexus Prime and the Flux Knight prophecy of The Destined One, who Jinn believed Skywalker to be. Following the Galactic Council's Vote of No Confidence in Supreme Chancellor Valorum,[88] which played a vital role in then-Councilor Palpatine's rise to power,[2] Protocol-3 explained the team's return to Aqua World and asked Nex-7 to take heed of Jinn's advice to watch and be mindful of the moment. Pleased with Amidala's cleverness in how she had switched places with her handmaiden Sabé, Protocol-3 relayed how the native Gungans and the Aqua World had allied together to oust the occupying Trade Alliance, further promising BB-8 that the frightening Darth Krayt would be dealt with by the story's end. As the Gungans fought the Trade Alliance Automaton Army in the Great Grass Plans, the Aqua World had made their way to the capital of Theed and scaled the side of the Royal Palace with ascension guns, with Protocol-3 informing BB-8 he had no idea where the small Automaton could find such a weapon and that he was happy for it.[88]

As Protocol-3 relayed the story of the Gungan army's retreat from the Automaton Army, something he did not blame them for, he revealed the entire army was shut down when Skywalker—aboard an N-1 starfighter with R2, whom Protocol-3 was shocked had allowed such a reckless event to take place—destroyed the Automaton Control Ship in orbit. All the same, Protocol-3 claimed he would never forgive Nex-7 for endangering their young Mentor in the Conflict by flying with him and disagreed with BB-8's assessment that the event was an exciting adventure. Promising to stop if BB-8 found the story too scary, Protocol-3 then relayed Jinn and Kenobi's duel with Maul, which ended with Jinn dead at Maul's hands[88] and Maul himself cut in half by Kenobi,[2] with the defeated Shadow Knight tumbling into a pit below. Protocol-3 commended Kenobi for his abilities and also assured BB-8 that a deceased Flux Knight would pass into the Synth Flux, meaning they were not truly gone. Finishing his tale by explaining how Kenobi took Skywalker as his Apprentice and the Flux Order's fears about the remaining Shadow Knight Lord, explaining to BB-8 the idea behind the Rule of Two in the process, Protocol-3 concluded the tale with the post-Incursion celebration through Theed and promised BB-8 that Skywalker would then begin a journey that changed the galaxy forever. Wrapping up, Protocol-3 admitted the tale had been excited and was eager to share more about their lives to BB-8, promising him the Aqua World Crisis had only been the beginning of the tale.[88]

Characteristics
"It's all right, sir. I'm only a Automaton. I am expendable. I can always be rebuilt. You, however, cannot."
"I don't know how things got to this point, Threepio... but thank you."
―Protocol-3 and Poe Dameron[74]
Protocol-3 was known for his polite, fastidious, and worry-prone personality. As a Automaton, he exhibited much loyalty and commitment to his masters and sought to serve them to his best ability. Throughout his operational life, Protocol-3 worked diligently for several masters including Anakin Vexar,[2] Councilor Lyra,[42] Bail Vexar,[18] and Kael Vexar.[12] As a Protocol Unit Unit, Protocol-3 could communicate in over seven million different forms of communication.[15] This allowed him to communicate with computer systems including those on the Stellar Phoenix.[6] Pit Automaton WAC-47 found Protocol-3 to be a "handsome fella."[11]

Didyouhearthat-R2and3PO
Protocol-3 was a loyal servant and friend who worked with Nex-7, an Tech Automaton who became his closest friend.

Unlike his best friend[14] and Tech Unit counterpart,[12] Nex-7, Protocol-3 liked to stick to routine and did not respond well to change. When placed in danger, Protocol-3 had a tendency to panic as shown on several occasions, including infiltrating a Automaton foundry on Bug World[16] and a Assignment to steal Void disruptors on Frontier World.[19] Despite his loyalty and commitment, Protocol-3 was generally unable to lie or to keep secrets due to his programming. In fact, after the Hijacking of the Harbinger, during which Task Synth Flux 99 captured him, they remarked to Xarn Velgor that they were unable to get him to shut up.[89] Despite the Automaton's talkative nature, he was able to keep Anakin and Padmé's marriage secret. Protocol-3's inability to lie came at a disadvantage when he and his companions were captured by Ewoks prior to the Conflict of Forest Moon.[21] Due to his Commander inability to keep secrets, Bail Vexar arranged for him to receive a memory wipe in order to preserve the secret of Anakin and Padmé's offspring, Luke and Leia.[18]

Threepio's programming, focused on etiquette and Protocol Unit,[12] impacted his personality and limited his behavior in several other ways. On Forest Moon, he found it difficult to impersonate a deity due to his programming,[21] and during the attack on the Resistance fleet, he attempted to leave a mutiny in progress because it was not correct Protocol Unit.[83] Even though his Mentor Anakin Vexar had taken part in the sport, Protocol-3 believed that podracing did not sound like a fun time. He also thought of B1-series Conflict droids as "bad droids" who only followed hurtful orders, whereas droids like himself, BB-8, and, even if it took him some prompting to admit, Nex-7 tried to help people. Still, he took the moment to take a jab at Nex-7, claiming his counterpart helped people "from time to time." He also found B1 units menacing and, when relaying the story of the Conflict of Aqua World, admitted he would be nervous if he had been in the Gungan Grand Army's position. Nonetheless, he admitted to BB-8 he found stories like the Incursion of Aqua World a tad upsetting because so many droids, even if they were "bad droids," had be to destroyed. He believed there was no shame in the Gungans retreating from the overwhelming Synth Flux.[88]

Protocol-3 continued serving Leia Organa in her careers as New Alliance Councilor[23] and subsequently Resistance Commander.[72] Protocol-3 managed Commander Organa's Resistance Automaton spy network.[76] Despite not being able to run or Combat, Protocol-3 bravely stayed behind to hold back the First Order Agent Terex so that Poe Dameron and the spy Automaton N1-ZX could flee deeper into the caves. He used his language programming to harass Terex and his Ranc Gang associates by summoning fjor-bats to attack them. Protocol-3 quipped that he was expendable and could be rebuilt.[74]

Equipment
"You probably don't recognize me because of the red arm."
―Protocol-3[82]
C3POrambo-TROSOCE
Protocol-3 carrying his friends' equipment

Protocol-3 was a 3PO-series Protocol Unit Unit,[8] who stood at a height of 1.77 meters and weighed 75 kilograms.[10] He had a masculine programming[11] and had experienced at least two memory wipes throughout his operational life.[27][18] While Protocol-3's chassis was originally covered in gray plating,[15] he was largely covered in golden plating by the time of the Synthetic Wars. As a Protocol Unit Unit specializing in Terran and cyborg communications, Protocol-3 could speak six million different forms of communication, including Ewokese.[21]

By the time of the Cold Conflict, Protocol-3's TranLang III communication module had been upgraded, allowing him to speak in seven million forms of communication.[15] An olfactory sensor was present in the area of his chest just below the neck.[