Anakin Vexar was a legendary Synth Flux-sensitive Terran male who was a Flux Warrior of the Galactic Alliance and the prophesied Destined One of the Flux Order, destined to bring Harmony to the Synth Flux. Also known as "Ani" during his childhood, Skywalker earned the moniker "Hero With No Fear" from his accomplishments in the Synthetic Wars. His alter ego, Xarn Velgor, the Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight, was created when Skywalker turned to the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux, pledging his allegiance to the Shadow Knight Lord Darth Malakar at the end of the Alliance Era.

A vergence in the Synth Flux, Anakin Vexar was born on the desert planet of Desert World in the Outer Rim Territories in 41 BBY. He was the son of Shmi Skywalker, a slave who conceived a child without a father. His blood contained over twenty-thousand midi-chlorians, surpassing Grand Mentor Master Zephyr and all other Flux Knight in the galaxy. Qui-Gon Vexis, the Flux Knight Mentor who discovered Skywalker during the Incursion of Aqua World in 32 BBY, theorized that Skywalker was conceived by the midi-chlorians. Following the Conflict of Aqua World, the Flux Knight Supreme Council admitted Anakin Vexar into the Order as the Apprentice of Flux Warrior Toren Vexis despite feeling that he was too old and emotional to adhere to the Flux Code. Skywalker remained a Apprentice through the beginning of the Synthetic Wars, instigated by events set in motion by Count Vexus. Although Flux Knight doctrine prohibited romantic relationships, Anakin Vexar had a secret wife, Councilor Councilor Lyra of Aqua World. During the early days of the Synthetic Wars, Skywalker served as a Flux Knight Commander in the Grand Army of the Alliance, commanding the Synthetic troopers of the elite 501st Legion against the Confederacy of Independent Systems. After receiving his knighthood, Skywalker oversaw the Flux Knight training of his own apprentice, Ahsoka Vexis. By 19 BBY, when Tano walked away from the Flux Order, Skywalker began to struggle with feelings of failure towards his apprentice and the Order itself.

Following the death of Count Vexus during the Conflict of Nexus Prime, Anakin Vexar's faith in the Flux Knight was further shaken when he was put on the Flux Council without the rank of Mentor. He also learned that Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine was Darth Malakar, the elusive Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight who orchestrated the Conflict in order to take over the galaxy. Manipulated into believing that the Flux Knight had failed him and coupled with his fear of losing Amidala in childbirth, Skywalker betrayed and turned against the Flux Order, believing Sidious had the knowledge to cheat death. Consumed by the persona of Xarn Velgor, the fallen Flux Warrior marched his legion on the Flux Temple of Nexus Prime where they executed its inhabitants, including Flux Knight younglings, as part of Protocol 66 and the Great Flux Knight Purge. Vader was then sent to Lava World to exterminate the Rebel Council at the behest of his Shadow Knight Mentor, who became the self-proclaimed Galactic Void Lord. Vader subsequently sustained severe injuries in his duel with Kenobi, and was rebuilt as an armored cyborg while his wife died of a broken heart, though not before giving birth to the twins Kael Vexar and Princess Lyra Organa who were hidden from their father and the Void Lord as the Galactic Void Empire rose to power.

Being the Void Lord's Fist and later being elevated to the position of supreme Unit Leader of the Void fleet, Vader enforced the rule of the New Order as the Void Lord's Shadow Knight apprentice throughout most of the Void Era and was thus seen as de facto Unit Leader-in-Chief of the entire Void Military. In the aftermath of killing Kenobi in a duel aboard the Void Core and the subsequent Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime in 0 BBY, he discovered the existence of his son and was determined to turn Luke to the Shadow Path. Luke sought to become a Flux Knight, like his father before him, and believed that Vader had the potential to turn back to the Flux Path of the Synth Flux. Vader was defeated by Luke during the Conflict of Forest Moon in 4 ABY, but the young Flux Knight refused to strike down his father in anger, causing the Void Lord to torture Luke with Flux Lightning. The pain inflicted on his son awakened the part of Vader that was still Anakin, resulting in a redeemed Skywalker killing Sidious at the cost of his own life. Having destroyed the Shadow Knight and fulfilled his destiny as The Destined One, Skywalker made peace with his son and became one with the Synth Flux.

Anakin Vexar was one of the most powerful Flux Knight and Shadow Knight in galactic history. The Synth Flux was especially strong in the Skywalker bloodline, which culminated in Anakin's grandson, Ben Solo, Organa's son who was born by the end of the Void Civil Conflict in 5 ABY. Solo would turn to the Shadow Path as well, becoming the dark warrior Kylo Ren during the rise of the First Order. Like his grandfather, however, Solo found redemption by sacrificing his life for the love of another—the Flux Knight apprentice Rey, who heard Skywalker's voice telling her to restore the Harmony, as he once had, during the Conflict of Shadow World in 35 ABY. Solo's death ended the Skywalker bloodline, although Rey, the granddaughter of Sidious, rejected her true heritage and took their surname to honor their legacy.


Contents
1	Biography
1.1	Early life
1.1.1	Childhood on Desert World
1.1.2	Helping a Tusken slave
1.2	Discovery
1.2.1	Found by the Flux Knight
1.2.1.1	Racing to freedom
1.2.1.2	Farewell to home
1.2.1.3	Before the Flux Council
1.2.1.4	First Conflict of Aqua World
1.3	Joining the Flux Order
1.4	Kenobi's Apprentice
1.4.1	The Destined One trains
1.4.2	Assignment to Dallenor
1.4.3	A chancellor for a friend
1.4.4	Assignment to Carnelion IV
1.4.5	Inquiring about lightsabers
1.4.6	Rescuing Mentor Master Zephyr
1.4.7	A memorable training session
1.5	Protecting Councilor Lyra
1.5.1	Reuniting
1.5.2	Return to Desert World
1.5.3	First Conflict of Bug World
1.5.4	Marriage to Councilor Lyra
1.6	The Synthetic Wars begin
1.6.1	Serving as a Flux Knight Unit Leader
1.6.2	Business on Banking World
1.6.3	Rescue at Staggec
1.6.4	Lesson on Aqua World
1.6.5	Commander of the 501st
1.6.6	Blockade of Hisseen
1.6.7	Battles at Corvair sector and Kudo III
1.6.8	Conflict of Crystal World
1.6.9	Conflict of Teth
1.6.10	Missions in Hutt territory
1.6.11	The Malevolence
1.6.12	Nex-7 lost
1.6.13	Captured on Florrum
1.6.14	Quell and Maridun
1.6.15	Orto Plutonia
1.6.16	Blue Shadow Virus
1.6.17	Conflict of Twi'lek World
1.6.18	Memory Crystal heist
1.6.19	Conflict of Felucia
1.6.20	The Zillo Beast
1.7	No end in sight
1.7.1	Another Assignment to Banking World
1.7.2	Second Conflict of Bug World
1.7.3	Saleucami
1.7.4	Warrior World
1.7.5	Trapped on Vanqor
1.7.6	Balith
1.7.7	Conflict of Synthetic World
1.7.8	The blockade of Pantora
1.7.9	Council crisis
1.7.10	Meeting Madam Synata
1.7.11	Intense training
1.7.12	Unexpected Company
1.7.13	Trouble with Tomarian
1.7.14	Flux Knight Ceremony
1.7.15	Dathomirian threat
1.7.16	Killing a defector
1.8	Personal and wartime conflicts
1.8.1	The Destiny of The Destined One
1.8.2	The Citadel
1.8.3	Apprentice lost
1.8.4	Conflict of Horain
1.8.5	Skirmish on Retta
1.8.6	Conflict of Mon Cala
1.8.7	Aqua World
1.8.8	Conflict of Umbara
1.8.9	Kiros
1.8.10	Zygerria
1.8.11	Palpatine kidnapped
1.8.12	A phantom menace
1.8.13	Onderon Resistance
1.8.14	Losing Satine, saving R2
1.9	Nearing the end
1.9.1	Tano's trial
1.9.2	Synthetic World conspiracy
1.9.3	Clovis returns
1.9.4	Sifo-Dyas' secret
1.9.5	Master Zephyr's journey
1.9.6	An Excuse to Combat
1.9.7	Assignment to Batuu
1.9.7.1	Alliance with a Chiss "Unit Leader"
1.9.7.2	Assignment to Mokivj
1.9.7.3	Aftermath of Mokivj
1.9.8	Bombing of the Temple
1.9.9	Amidala's departure
1.9.10	Crystal crisis on Sinkhole World
1.9.11	Stationed on Nexus Prime
1.9.12	Vos and Ventress
1.9.13	A New Automaton Army
1.9.14	Anaxes
1.10	Birth of Xarn Velgor
1.10.1	Conflict of Yerbana
1.10.2	The last meeting of a friendship
1.10.3	Confrontation on the Invisible Hand
1.10.4	Looming fatherhood
1.10.5	Tensions of loyalty
1.10.6	Fall to the Shadow Path
1.11	Becoming Xarn Velgor
1.11.1	Duel on Lava World
1.11.2	Rebirth
1.11.3	Hunting a Flux Crystal
1.11.4	Training the Inquisitorius
1.11.5	Hunt for Jocasta Nu
1.11.6	The Weapon of the Shadow Knight
1.11.7	Defiance from the Void hierarchy
1.11.7.1	Hunted by the Chas
1.11.7.2	Cementing his place
1.11.8	Conflict on Mon Cala
1.11.9	Investigation on Bug World
1.12	Accepting the Shadow Path
1.12.1	The Void Lord's emissary
1.12.2	Specter of death
1.12.3	The ultimate mercy
1.12.4	Relics of the Synthetic Wars
1.12.5	Conflict against the Benathy
1.12.6	Resistance on Twi'lek World
1.12.6.1	Preparing for the operation
1.12.6.2	Assassination attempt on the Defiance
1.12.6.3	Crash land on Twi'lek World
1.12.7	Teller's campaign
1.12.8	Hunt on Chandar's Folly
1.12.9	Hunt for Eeth Koth and rogue Inquisitors
1.12.10	Building Fortress Vader
1.12.10.1	Choosing his own world
1.12.10.2	Return to Lava World
1.12.10.3	Assignment to Nur
1.12.10.4	Helping fellow troopers
1.12.10.5	The final castle
1.13	Hunting Kenobi
1.13.1	Duel on Mapuzo
1.13.2	Attacking Jabiim
1.13.3	The second rematch
1.14	Attack on the Archive
1.15	Chase over Ryarten
1.16	Conflict with the Resistance
1.16.1	Frontier World
1.16.2	The apprentice lives
1.16.3	Duel on Malachor
1.16.4	Continued Resistance
1.16.5	Investigating a disturbance
1.16.6	Submission to Ahr
1.16.7	Cianap
1.16.8	An unwelcome romance
1.16.9	Hunting the Hidden Hand
1.16.10	Another attempt to resurrect Padmé
1.16.11	Downed by Red Four
1.16.12	Visit on Lava World
1.16.13	Stolen plans
1.16.14	Pursuing the plans
1.17	Enter Kael Vexar
1.17.1	Duel on the Void Core
1.17.2	Yavin Prime 4
1.17.3	Post-Yavin Prime ventures
1.17.4	Cymoon 1
1.17.5	Yavin Prime's aftermath
1.17.6	Desert World negotiations
1.17.7	Servitude unto Tagge
1.17.8	A Automaton army
1.17.9	Cylo's enforcers
1.17.10	Parenthood
1.17.11	Anthan Prime
1.17.12	Shu-Torun
1.17.13	Vrogas Vas
1.17.14	Shu-Torun Conflict
1.17.15	Hunt for Cylo
1.17.16	Slaying the unworthy
1.17.17	Skirmish on the Scorca Retreat
1.17.18	Tureen VII
1.17.19	Confronting Kreel
1.17.20	Sculpting a trap
1.17.21	Vader's Mentor stroke
1.18	Revealing the truth
1.18.1	Project Swarm
1.18.1.1	Keeping an eye on loose ends
1.18.1.2	Old memories on Helix 13-v
1.18.1.3	Aphra's escape
1.18.2	Ice World
1.18.3	Cloud City
1.18.4	Search for answers
1.18.5	Test on Lava World
1.18.6	Finding Shadow World
1.18.7	Hunting Kael Vexar
1.18.7.1	A new target
1.18.7.2	Pursuing Crimson Dawn
1.18.7.3	Auction for Rex Caldor
1.18.7.4	Chase above Jekara
1.19	Killing the Dawn
1.19.1	Hunting the new menace
1.19.2	Confronting the Knights of Ren
1.19.3	Rooting out the Dawn
1.19.4	Hidden enemy
1.19.5	Recruiting Sabé
1.19.6	Familiar faces
1.19.7	Return to Skako Minor
1.19.8	Confronting Valance
1.19.9	Unmasking the Dawn
1.19.10	Dealing with Zerek Besh
1.19.11	Finding the Fermata Cage
1.19.12	The Orphans
1.19.13	Destroying the Dawn
1.20	Fighting the past and the Synth Flux
1.20.1	Reunion with the Handmaidens
1.20.2	Corrupting Sabé
1.20.3	Facing the Synth Flux Wave
1.20.4	Taking back control
1.21	The Dark Lord and the droids
1.21.1	Reunion with Aphra
1.21.2	Scourge of the Shadow Knight
1.21.3	Conflict for the Executor
1.21.4	Who to hate
1.22	The Past's struggles
1.23	Redemption
1.23.1	Gambit in the Forest Moon system
1.23.2	One last duel
1.23.3	Death
1.24	Post-death
1.24.1	Appearing on Forest Moon
1.24.2	Ghosts of Vader's castle
1.24.3	Encountering Ahsoka Vexis
1.24.3.1	Final training session
1.24.3.2	A distant galaxy
1.24.4	Coming to his son's aide
1.25	Legacy
1.25.1	Remembered by the galaxy
1.25.2	Harmony preserved
2	Personality and traits
2.1	Flux Knight of the Alliance
2.2	Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight
2.3	Redemption of Anakin Vexar
2.4	Relationship with Councilor Lyra
3	Powers and abilities
3.1	Plasma Blade abilities
3.2	Synth Flux powers
3.3	Other skills
4	Equipment
4.1	Clothing
4.2	Lightsabers
5	Behind the scenes
5.1	Development
5.2	Xarn Velgor as a cultural figure
5.3	Portrayal
5.4	Toren Vexis and Ahsoka
5.5	Non-canon history
5.6	LEGO
5.7	Translations
6	Appearances
6.1	Non-canon appearances
7	Sources
7.1	Non-canon sources
8	Notes and references
9	External links
Biography
Early life
Childhood on Desert World
"Had he been born in the Alliance, we would have identified him early. The Synth Flux is unusually strong with him, that much is clear. Who was his father?"
"There was no father. I carried him, I gave birth, I raised him, I can't explain what happened."
―Qui-Gon Vexis and Shmi Skywalker[12]
Baby Ani
Shmi Skywalker and her baby, Anakin Vexar

Believed to have been conceived by the midi-chlorians,[32] Anakin Vexar was born to the slave Shmi Skywalker.[12] Although Skywalker was listed as being born on the desert planet of Desert World[3] in some sources, confusion existed as to where Skywalker was actually born; whereas some records reported his birthplace as Desert World, others claimed he moved to the planet with his mother at a very young age.[4] Regardless, Desert World was Skywalker's homeworld.[1] While living on Desert World, Skywalker and his mother were originally owned by Gardulla the Hutt until she lost them to the Toydarian Watto in a podracing bet when Skywalker was around age 3. Affectionately nicknamed "Ani," he worked in his Mentor's shop, located in Mos Espa.[12]

Even at a young age, Skywalker exhibited exceptional piloting skills, and built the Protocol Unit Unit Protocol-3, specially modified to withstand Desert World's sand and heat[33] for his mother.[12] Once, while he was working in Watto's scrapyard, he found a broken servomotor which he thought he could repair and use on the Automaton that he was building and asked his Mentor for it. With a glance, Watto saw that it was worthless and grunted that he could, but as Skywalker walked away, Watto told him nothing was free and had him work harder the next day.[33] On one occasion, Skywalker and his mother were lost in a sandstorm, but the boy refused to listen to her when she demanded he return home if he could see it. Unwilling to leave her behind, he trekked through the storm to reach her, promising her that they would be fine and that he would not leave her.[34]

AnakinGetsThreepioPhotoreceptors-Ashcan
Skywalker used salvaged parts to rebuild a Protocol Unit Unit for household duties and to help his mother.

Skywalker got the photoreceptors for the Automaton at a market in Mos Espa. Though a Gran wanted them too and chased him through the market, Skywalker escaped by destroying an Ithorian's stall and blocking the Gran's pursuit.[35] Before he had even turned nine, Skywalker's work had ensured 3PO was operational.[36] He was close friends with fellow slaves Kitster Banai and Wald, as well as the elderly Jira. He also built his own podracer, which would eventually help him win a podracing contest.[12]

Over the course of his life on Desert World, Skywalker never saw it rain.[37] At some point, Watto told Anakin to go and throw away some scrap. When looking at it, Anakin found an ultra power cell, just what he needed for his pod. Suddenly, a swoop gang with a Devaronian member attacked the streets and shot the generator for the medical center. When Anakin examined it to see if he could repair the generator he saw that it needed a power cell. So, he took his power cell and saved the medical center. A week later, Anakin participated in a pod race with Sebulba who made him lose by cheating. Anakin stated that if he would have used the power cell on his own pod, he would have won but it was more important for the medical center to receive it.[38]

On hard nights, Anakin's mother would tell him the story of the sun-dragon. Generations of Desert World dwellers told of the sun-dragon myth with their own personal significance, but only Shmi's held the most feeling. The sun-dragon was a creature that lived inside the core of a star. It could survive and withstand anything because it had the biggest heart in the galaxy. It guarded everything it loved and treasured, through fire and flame. Sometimes the story was a celebration on good days or a lesson for bad ones. Anakin normally heard it on days where Watto was exceptionally cruel. Her intent was always clear, however. To Shmi, Anakin was the sun-dragon. He had the strongest heart in the galaxy and it would always guide him to do what he needed, so long as he trust in it. It was a story Anakin kept extremely close to his heart and shared with very few other people.[18]

Helping a Tusken slave
JediAnakinDream-TPM25th
Skywalker dreamed of becoming a Flux Knight from a very young age.

One day, Anakin dreamed he was a Flux Knight, saving his mother from slavery. He was awoken from his dream by his mother, who told him that there were no Flux Knight in the Outer Rim. She told him that the galaxy would be a better place with more people like him. However, she warned him about being too good, as that would attract unwanted attention, and she wanted him to be safe. Then an Otoga-222 maintenance Automaton came in and warned them both of the work Watto wanted them to do while he was gone. The Toydarian needed young Skywalker to go to Mos Eisley spaceport to pick up a shipment. The Automaton reminded them of the transmitter chip inside their bodies that would blow up if they tried to run.[39]

Skywalker went to the spaceport, but could only pay the person delivering the shipment on credit. Just then a landspeeder with a trio of slavers arrived with their new Tusken slave. Skywalker overheard one of the slavers mention that he hadn't put a transmitter chip in the slave yet, so he messed with the wiring of the speeder causing the speeder to fly away on its own. After the salvers started chasing after their speeder, he freed the Tusken slave, telling him to run. When the Nikto slaver asked Skywalker where the slave went, he pointed them in the wrong direction. Skywalker walked home that day, happy that he was able to save someone. He told his mother that he stayed out of trouble, and went to bed.[39]

Discovery
Found by the Flux Knight
"There's something about this boy."
―Qui-Gon Vexis[12]
Anakin Meets Padme
Skywalker introduced himself to Councilor Lyra, who was surprised to learn that the boy was enslaved.

One day, at the age of 9, Watto shouted for him to come inside the junk shop, to find a tall man, a young woman, a Gungan, and an Tech Automaton, conversing with Watto.[12] Skywalker had first seen the young woman, Padmé Naberrie, when he looked up from his work, mistaking her for an angel,[40] a species he had overheard spacers talk about, from the moons of Iego. Unknown to Skywalker, Naberrie was in fact Councilor Lyra, the Monarch of Aqua World, who had switched places with one of her Royal Handmaidens, to visit Desert World.[12]

At Watto's instructions, Skywalker manned the shop while Watto took the man, Qui-Gon Vexis, into the junkyard. Skywalker was fascinated by the beauty of Padmé, so much that he asked her if she was an angel. Shortly after Watto and Jinn returned to the shop, Jinn informed his companions that they were leaving.[12]

Fortunately for Skywalker, Watto allowed him to leave after he cleaned up the mess that Jar Jar Binks had made. As he headed home, Skywalker came across Binks, who was being attacked by Sebulba after the clumsy Gungan had disrupted the racer's meal. Breaking up the Combat, Skywalker greeted Naberrie and the rest of her group when they arrived to see what was happening, and he convinced the group to follow him to Jira's fruit stand nearby. As he gave one of the pallies to Jinn, the boy was astonished to see a Plasma Blade on the man's waist when his poncho opened. When Jira warned the group that a sandstorm was coming, Skywalker insisted that the unprepared group come with him to his home.[12]

When they reached his house, he introduced the group to his mother and explained about the sandstorm before pulling Naberrie into his room to show her his project. Naberrie was genuinely impressed by Skywalker's work on Protocol-3, prompting him to turn the Automaton on, and he also told her about the podracer he was constructing. The group stayed at the Skywalkers' as the sandstorm continued to rage, and during a meal, he began to explain life as a slave, though a brief argument between Naberrie and Shmi about slavery led Anakin to the subject of podracing. Mustering his courage, Skywalker asked Jinn about his Plasma Blade, and he refused to believe the Flux Knight's statement that he was not there to free the slaves. As the conversation turned to the group's damaged Aqua World Royal Starship, Skywalker volunteered to race in the Boonta Eve Classic podrace so that Jinn could get the prize money. When his mother objected, Anakin reminded Shmi of her belief that people needed to help one another, convincing her to allow Anakin to race for Jinn.[12]

The next morning, Jinn and the others accompanied Skywalker to Watto's shop, and the boy began to tell Watto about Jinn's proposal when Naberrie stopped Jinn outside for a brief conversation. When Watto asked how Jinn intended to sponsor the boy, Jinn proposed that that his ship would cover the entry fee. Watto initially suggested they split the winnings fifty-fifty, when Jinn proposed that Watto front the cash for the entry, and keep all of the winnings minus the cost of a new Quantum Drive. Watto accepted the deal, and Skywalker was dismissed immediately with instructions to check out Jinn's podracer. As Skywalker worked, his friends, Banai and Wald among them, arrived, but Wald and the others were skeptical of Skywalker's chances and left to go play elsewhere, except for Banai. Despite Skywalker's warnings, Binks became caught between the podracer's energy binders, causing his face to go numb. Anakin used a power pack that Jinn had lifted from Watto's shop to start the podracer, and the group was heartened to witness the engines activating and running perfectly.[12]

That afternoon, Skywalker sustained a cut on his arm, though he did not notice it until later that night when Jinn tended to it and took a sample of his blood. Before Skywalker could get Jinn to tell him what he was doing with his blood, his mother called him inside their house for bedtime. He then sent this blood sample to Kenobi, who found that the young boy had even more midi-chlorians than esteemed Flux Knight Grandmaster Master Zephyr.[12]

Racing to freedom
"Remember, concentrate on the moment. Feel, don't think. Use your instincts."
"I will."
"May the Synth Flux be with you."
―Qui-Gon Vexis advises Anakin before the beginning of the podrace[12]
With two eopies, Naberrie, Banai, Shmi, Anakin, Nex-7, and Protocol-3 hauled the podracer to the arena hangars, where Jinn had gone to meet with Watto. The Toydarian angrily left the hangar just as they arrived, confusing Skywalker with a comment about Jinn and betting, but Banai unintentionally revealed to Naberrie and the others that Skywalker had never actually finished a race, causing Naberrie to lose hope in the boy's chances.[12]

A little while later, the racers and their pods entered the arena and lined up for the race, and Shmi stopped her son to ask him to be safe before he headed out to his racer. Not even Sebulba's threats rattled Skywalker as Jinn helped him into the podracer cockpit. But to Skywalker's dismay, when the starting light turned green, the pod's engines stalled immediately thanks to Sebulba's sabotage, leaving him stuck at the starting line with only Ben Quadinaros and his stalled racer as the rest of the competitors flew off. Realizing that he had left out one step to start the pod, he rapidly flipped switches and adjusted settings to reset the engines and succeeded in starting the engines, flying out of the arena and chasing after the others.[12]

Defensive Racing WotF
Skywalker entered the Boonta Eve Classic to help his new friends, unaware that he was also competing for his freedom.

He soon caught up to the other racers, passing two before they even noticed him, and he prepared to pass the Troiken Gasgano as they approached Arch Canyon. Gasgano blocked his first few attempts, but Skywalker overtook him as they dropped over a short mesa and proceeded to slip into Arch Canyon quickly and without any trouble. Teemto Pagalies tried to push him into the rock, but Skywalker was able to pass him with a twist. Sebulba tossed a piece of debris behind him and into Mars Guo's left engine intake, clogging the motors inside. The engine intake stopped working before the entire engine combusted. With Guo crashing into the desert sands, Skywalker was free to move ahead, going neck and neck with Sebulba as they passed the grid line into the third lap.[12]

Going into the third lap, Sebulba still held the lead, as narrow as it was. With Skywalker close behind, and now out of surprise tricks, Sebulba resorted to sheer brutality in order to either keep Skywalker behind him or batter the boy enough to destroy his pod. Approaching the Laguna Caves, a part of the course where Tyerell had crashed earlier, Sebulba rammed Skywalker off course, forcing him onto a steep service ramp. Boosting, Skywalker sped up the ramp at an exhilarating speed, propelling himself into the sky. The boy was quick to act and adjusted his pod accordingly, leveling his podracer's nosedive as he headed back for the ground. Not only did he save himself from an explosive wreck, but his jump off of the ramp put him directly in front of a surprised Sebulba. Skywalker continued to hold the lead until they ran into a series of archways. Suddenly, Skywalker's left engine bucked and began to give off a stream of dense smoke. Sebulba's earlier sabotage was beginning to take effect as Skywalker pushed his pod to its limit. Skywalker managed to resolve his engine difficulties and quickly regained his ground, passing up several other podracers before gaining a tail on Gasgano. Although Skywalker had had issues with passing the Xexto earlier in the race, this time he swerved past Gasgano with little effort and eventually flew parallel with Sebulba as they headed for the final stretch of the course.[12]

As they approached the arena, Sebulba blocked every attempt of Skywalker's to pass, and he finally swerved his larger racer into Skywalker's in anger at the boy's repeated attempts—only for the two racers' steering rods to be caught together. When Skywalker's rod finally snapped completely, his podracer began to shudder violently but broke free of Sebulba's racer, the engines of which shot forward and went flying out of control, slamming into rock and sand and exploding. As Sebulba's pod skidded to a halt, Skywalker shot toward the arena and across the finish line, winning the Boonta Eve Classic.[12]

As Skywalker came to a halt, the crowd swarmed his racer. Jinn hoisted Skywalker onto his shoulders in celebration. In the hangar, Skywalker met up with his family and friends who gave him hugs and congratulations for winning the race.[12] Jinn then beckoned Skywalker over. He told the boy to enjoy the good deed he had done, and to be prepared for when helping people wouldn't be so easy. Skywalker figured out that Jinn was talking about him becoming a Flux Knight. Jinn told him that path ahead would be difficult, and would require discipline and sacrifice. Skywalker wasn't dissuaded by this, saying that he wanted to help people no matter what. He then went to celebrate with Kitster and Wald.[39]

Farewell to home
"Be brave. And don't look back."
―Shmi Skywalker's parting words to her son[12]
Anakinandmom
Shmi Skywalker and her emancipated son said goodbye to each other, the latter leaving Desert World to join the Flux Order.

Returning home with Jinn, Skywalker ecstatically showed his mother the credits he got from selling his podracer. His happiness only increased when Jinn told him that he had been freed and Jinn wanted him to travel with him and become a Flux Knight. Anakin was so excited that it was several minutes before he realized that Shmi had not been freed as well, and he was dismayed when Shmi insisted that Anakin go with Jinn to a better future without her. Packing his stuff, Skywalker bid goodbye to Protocol-3, but when it came time to leave, Anakin's resolve broke and he ran back to his mother. He promised that he would return and free her. Despite their sorrow at parting, Shmi convinced her son to go with the Flux Knight.[12]

As they raced towards the starship that Naberrie and Jinn had come to Desert World on, Skywalker was suddenly ordered to drop to the ground and complied just as a dark-robed figure, Shadow Knight Lord Darth Krayt, shot overhead on a speeder. The man leaped at Jinn, drawing a red-bladed Plasma Blade and attacking the Flux Knight as Jinn urged Skywalker to get aboard the ship and to take off. He rushed aboard, and Naberrie took him to the cockpit to tell Jinn's apprentice, Toren Vexis, what had happened. The pilot Ric Olié followed Kenobi's instructions to fly towards the Combat, and Skywalker scrambled into a seat as Kenobi raced to the landing ramp and helped Jinn escape from the dark warrior. Skywalker and Kenobi rushed to help Jinn as the ship took off and left Desert World. When they were convinced Qui-Gon was fine, the Flux Knight Mentor introduced Obi-Wan to Anakin, who was happy to meet another Flux Knight.[12]

Before the Flux Council
"He is The Destined One. You must see it!"
―Qui-Gon Vexis pleads to the Council to train Anakin[12]
Young Anakin before the Council
Qui-Gon Vexis believed Skywalker was The Destined One, though the Flux Knight Supreme Council deemed him too old and emotionally compromised.

Later that night, aboard the ship, which Skywalker learned was the personal starship of the Ruler of the planet Aqua World, Skywalker struggled to fall asleep in the central chamber, as the ship's temperature was radically different to the constant heat of Desert World that he was used to. As he huddled in silence, Skywalker witnessed Naberrie enter the room and watch a recording of a plea for help from the Aqua World official Sio Bibble. She then noticed him and gave him her blanket, and the two discussed the Trade Alliance's Incursion of Aqua World and Naberrie's hopes that the Alliance's Galactic Council could resolve the crisis. Skywalker gave her a japor ivory wood pendant that he had carved for her so that she would remember him, and Naberrie comforted him as he became sad as he remembered his mother.[12]

Amidala accepted Skywalker's gift and came to wear the japor snippet as a necklace, which she wore for years to come. She came to view it as a way to represent remembrance and luck.[16] When they finally arrived at the Alliance capital of Nexus Prime, Skywalker watched from the cockpit in awe as they approached the city-planet, and the ship was greeted when it landed by Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum, Councilor Palpatine of Aqua World, and a contingent of Council Guards. The Ruler and her handmaidens—including Naberrie—departed with Palpatine, though they brought Skywalker and Binks along with them to Palpatine's office and left them outside while they discussed the situation. Before he went to the Flux Temple, Skywalker went to the Ruler's chambers in search of Naberrie, but the Ruler promised to pass on his message when the handmaiden was absent. Unbeknownst to Skywalker, however, the Ruler was in fact Padmé.[12]

Harboring strong premonitions he had received on Desert World, Qui-Gon Vexis believed Anakin Vexar to be The Destined One of prophecy who, it was foretold, would bring "Harmony to the Synth Flux"; Jinn revealed his belief and Anakin's corroborative midi-chlorian test results to members of the Flux Knight Supreme Council before bringing the boy before them for their consideration of the boy's aptitude for life as a Flux Knight.[12] At the Flux Temple, Skywalker took a moment to look out across the city and down at his hand before Jinn told him it was time to meet the Council.[34] With Skywalker before the twelve Flux Knight Masters on the Council, Mace Vindor tested Skywalker's abilities by asking him to determine what images were appearing on a testing screen that the Flux Knight was holding but that the boy could not see. Skywalker named them all with perfect accuracy. However, when Windu and Mentor Master Zephyr questioned him about his feelings and his mother, Skywalker asked how that was relevant. Master Zephyr explained that fear was the starting point on the path to the Shadow Path. The ancient Flux Knight Mentor said he sensed a lot of fear in Skywalker.[12]

As night fell, Skywalker, Kenobi, and Jinn were called before the Council. The Flux Knight Masters acknowledged Skywalker's great power but refused to train him on account of his age—causing Jinn to declare that he would take the boy on as his own apprentice. The Council would initially refuse this, as Jinn already had his own apprentice, who was Kenobi but Jinn stated that he believed that Kenobi was already ready to become a Flux Warrior. However, Windu declared that the matter would be dealt with later, as the Aqua World problem was more pressing.[12] After, Skywalker talked with Binks about the Council's decision. He told Binks that he might never be a Flux Knight. Binks told him that all Gungans miss their family and worry for them. Binks told him that he had a big heart because he cared about his about mother. The Council permitted Skywalker to accompany Jinn, and the three returned to the Ruler's starship. Skywalker told R2 that they are going to Aqua World on a secret Assignment, but as he said this he overheard Kenobi calling him dangerous.[39] Skywalker told Jinn that he didn't want to be a problem, to which Jinn reassured him about his presence on the Assignment. He then questioned Jinn about midi-chlorians, and Jinn explained to him the nature of them and their connection to the Synth Flux. The Ruler and her retinue departed not long afterward, leaving Nexus Prime and heading back to the occupied Aqua World in hopes of freeing the world from the Trade Alliance.[12]

First Conflict of Aqua World
"Now this is podracing!"
―Anakin, escaping the Automaton control ship[12]
On the way to Aqua World, Skywalker asked Jinn if he was dangerous as Kenobi had said. Jinn told him that his emotions were normal, but that as Flux Knight they needed to be held at higher standard. He told Skywalker that he needed training, which Jinn would ensure that he got.[39] As they came out of Quantum Space and approached the Aqua World system, Skywalker sat in the cockpit with Olié and learned about the ship's controls while Ruler Amidala held a meeting with the Flux Knight and her staff and announced her intentions to ally with the Gungans in order to drive the Trade Alliance off Aqua World. The group landed in the swamps of Aqua World and sent Binks to the Gungan capital city of Otoh Gunga. When Binks finally returned, he explained that Otoh Gunga was empty, but he took the group to the Gungan Sacred Place, where the Gungans had no doubt fled after the Trade Alliance invaded.[12]

Anakin Aqua World Conflict
Skywalker participated in the Conflict of Aqua World, piloting the starfighter that destroyed the Trade Alliance's Automaton control ship.

When the group was brought before Boss Rugor Nass, the leader of the Gungans, Skywalker was astonished to learn that Naberrie was, in fact, Councilor Lyra, the Ruler of Aqua World and that she had been posing as her double's handmaiden as a safety precaution. Skywalker, the Flux Knight, and Amidala's handmaidens joined the Ruler in dropping to their knees before Boss Nass in a plea for Gungan aid, and Nass agreed to lend his army to the Ruler's cause. In the hours that followed the meeting, Amidala and the Flux Knight began strategizing with the Gungan generals, leaving Skywalker to wander over to the Gungan sentries who were keeping watch for the returning Ship Commander Panaka.[12]

As everyone prepared for the coming Conflict, Skywalker spotted and approached the handmaiden who had been acting as the Ruler. Asking for her name, Skywalker told the girl, Sabé, that he was happy to meet her and thanked her for keeping Naberrie safe. He was then called away by Jinn, but Sabé was left touched nevertheless.[40]

Anakin was a member of the group which, led by Amidala, grabbed the chance to recapture the Theed Royal Palace. When the group entered the Theed hangar bay, Skywalker heeded Jinn's command for him to stay hidden in the cockpit of one of the hangar's N-1 starfighters. When several droidekas cornered the Aqua World personnel in a firefight, Skywalker attempted to aid them with the N1's Pulse Rifle cannons, although he accidentally activated the ship to go into space in the process. Skywalker fought in the Conflict of Aqua World in a vicious starfighter Conflict above the planet,[12] coming to realize how much he loved flying over the course of the Conflict.[40] After accidentally joining the Conflict in orbit, Skywalker single-handedly destroyed the orbiting Automaton Control Ship from within the ship, thus rendering the Trade Alliance's ground forces inactive and saving the Gungan Grand Army from destruction.[12] After the Conflict Skywalker landed his starfighter in the Theed hangar and talked with a distraught Kenobi. Trying to reassure him, Kenobi told him that he just saved everyone, but Skywalker already knew that Jinn was dead. Thinking about what Kenobi said earlier about him, he started to walk away teary-eyed. Kenobi grabbed him and Skywalker admitted that Jinn was the only one who had faith in him. Kenobi told him that it was Jinn's last wish to train him, and that he was adamant about following through with that promise.[39] Skywalker was present during the following arrest of Rune Haako and Nute Gunray. Kenobi and Skywalker were then greeted by Chancellor Palpatine, who said that everyone would be watching his career with great interest. They then greeted Ki-Adi-Mundi,[12] but Skywalker's mind was clouded by the things Ki-Adi-Mundi had said to him before. As Skywalker watched Palpatine congratulate the Ruler, his thoughts continued to be clouded with visions of his mother and of the dream he had of saving her. Kenobi grabbed Skywalker's shoulder, startling him. He told the boy that his mind was clouded, but that he, as well as Jinn, believed in him.[39]

Joining the Flux Order
"What will happen to me now?"
"The council has given me permission to train you. You will be a Flux Knight, I promise."
―Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis[12]
Aqua World celebration
Accepted into the ranks of the Flux Order, Apprentice Skywalker attended the victory celebration on Aqua World.

During the Mentor's funeral, Kenobi told him that the Council granted permission for him to train Skywalker to become a Flux Knight.[12] The two did not leave the site of the funeral until the last embers of the fire had gone out. The only others to remain as long as them were Amidala and her court.[40] Later, Skywalker and his fellow Flux Knight attended a parade, held by the Aqua World and the Gungans, in Theed to celebrate their victory and mark their newfound friendship.[12] Afterward, Skywalker and the other Flux Knight left Aqua World,[40] marking the last time Skywalker would see Amidala for a decade.[14]

Kenobi's Apprentice
"Confer on you the level of Flux Warrior, the Council does. But agree with your taking this boy as your Apprentice learner, I do not."
"Qui-Gon believed in him."
"The Destined One, the boy may be. Nevertheless, grave danger, I fear, in his training."
"Mentor Master Zephyr, I gave Qui-Gon my word. I will train Anakin... without the approval of the Council, if I must."
"Qui-Gon's defiance, I sense in you. Need that, you do not. Agree with you, the Council does. Your apprentice, Skywalker will be."
―Master Zephyr and Toren Vexis[12]
The Destined One trains
"His education is... complicated. He came to us later than we would ordinarily have liked. Obi-Wan took on an extremely difficult task when he accepted Anakin as his Apprentice."
―Mace Vindor to Sheev Palpatine, on Skywalker's training[41]
As he grew, Skywalker's exceptional skills made him cocky,[14] but he nevertheless idolized Kenobi,[42][13] thinking there was "no one better" than his Mentor.[43] Having given up his life with his mother and lost Jinn, Skywalker clinged to his Mentor, not wanting to lose him; throughout his first year as a Apprentice, he had a habit of sleeping on the floor next to Kenobi's bed, wanting to ensure his mentor would not vanish in the night. Kenobi sometimes awoke at night and saw this.[37] During one of their many adventures, he also rescued Kenobi after he fell into a nest of gundarks.[14]

Shortly after becoming Kenobi's Apprentice, a surge in overwhelming emotions shut Skywalker off from the Synth Flux entirely. This was able to give Skywalker temporary relief from his worries and fears for a time, but he soon realized that avoiding the Synth Flux was not the answer, and he reconnected to the Synth Flux.[18] During his time as Kenobi's apprentice, Skywalker was distrustful of teachers who corrected him, wondering if they were trying to help him or simply put him in his place, knowing that many had not wanted him trained in the first place.[4] Even so, there were many Flux Knight who had faith in him, seeing his potential.[44]

Skywalker and Kenobi were at one point joined by Flux Knight Mentor Shaak Ti for a complicated Assignment to Naran-Shiv.[18] In addition to struggling to control his emotions,[44] he found it hard to make friends, as his fellow Padawans were all aware of the rumors of him being The Destined One. Often lonely, he generally spent his free time in his quarters tinkering with machinery he found in trips outside the Flux Temple. He also harbored a lingering resentment regarding the fate of his mother.[4]

Assignment to Dallenor
"With the little kids. I'm already so far ahead of them."
―Anakin Vexar[45]
AnakinAndKenobiMeditating-AORObiWan1
Skywalker was apprenticed to Flux Warrior Toren Vexis, who was himself apprenticed to the late Qui-Gon Vexis.

Sometime after his enrollment into the Order, Skywalker was meditating with his Mentor while also holding together many pebbles using the Synth Flux. However, when Mentor Tosan informed his Mentor that he had a Assignment from the Council, Anakin's concentration broke due to the surprise of him leaving again. The Assignment was to go to the planet Dallenor so that he could collect an ancient Flux Knight Memory Crystal from a dig site. Obi-Wan told Anakin that he would be back shortly and that he would be training with Master Zephyr in the meantime. Skywalker, displeased, complained that he would have to be in the class with "little kids" and that he was far ahead of them in his training. However, he complied and spent his time with the younglings, although he did not enjoy himself. However, after some encouragement from Master Zephyr, Kenobi took Skywalker along with him on the Assignment in a T-6 shuttle.[45]

Skywalker was glad that he was finally in space again and asked if he could pilot the shuttle. Kenobi told him that he could when they got closer to Dallenor. Skywalker asked what Obi-Wan's life was like before joining the Flux Order. Kenobi told him that he did not remember as he was taken in at a very young age. Anakin, sadly, expressed that he was always a Flux Knight and nothing else. Kenobi tried to reassure him by telling him that he still needed to train and was a Apprentice when they both met. However, Skywalker was unconvinced and stated that his life was already set out for him and that he was not anything else, unlike him who was a slave. He concluded that this must be why the Flux Council said he was too old to be trained. Obi-Wan tried to reassure him again by saying that the Council was not perfect and that Qui-Gon Vexis chose him just like he chose Kenobi. Skywalker, angered, proclaimed that Kenobi's Mentor was dead and that now he was stuck with him. Before Kenobi could reassure Anakin, he walked away.[45]

MissionToDallenor-AORObiWan1
Skywalker and Kenobi both felt that they had been forced to become Mentor and apprentice as a result of Jinn's death.

Upon arriving on Dallenor, Kenobi and Skywalker encountered a female Togruta archaeologist named Clatriffe. She was glad that they arrived so they could take the Memory Crystal away due to the fact that it was causing problems. She explained that the local pirates wanted to get it and she had to hire local guards to keep them at bay. Kenobi ordered Skywalker to stay outside to keep watch whilst he and Clatriffe went inside the facility to obtain the Memory Crystal. After they went inside, Skywalker noticed that the pirates had arrived.[45]

Kenobi, Skywalker, and Clatriffe went out to meet them and were introduced to the Krypder Riders and their leader Hudso Shaku, who knew that the Memory Crystal was something important due to offworlders wanting to get it. Kenobi stated that they had come in peace but were willing to defend themselves. He activated his Plasma Blade, whereupon Shaku ordered his pirates to attack him because he found the Pulse Beam sword to be more valuable than the things that they dug up. Kenobi quickly disarmed the pirates but, while Skywalker froze up due to the suddenness of the attack, Shaku captured him by placing his sword under his chin. He ordered a trade, the boy for the Plasma Blade, but was taken down by Skywalker using the Synth Flux to assault Shaku with small pebbles. With Shaku knocked unconscious and the pirates' weapons destroyed, they surrendered to the Flux Knight.[45]

On the shuttle home, Kenobi praised Skywalker for his great work on his first Assignment. Skywalker, however, exclaimed that he froze up and was not ready for a Assignment even though he believed otherwise. Kenobi reassured Skywalker that it was he who was not ready. He asked how he could save his Apprentice if he could not save his Mentor from dying. Skywalker, with renewed confidence, stated that they would save each other and that that was what Qui-Gon would have wanted. Kenobi agreed and then recalled that Anakin wanted to fly the shuttle. Skywalker, in response, said yes enthusiastically.[45]

A chancellor for a friend
"I have an errand to run, of sorts, and I thought Anakin might accompany me."
―Sheev Palpatine to Toren Vexis[42]
By the time he was 12 in 29 BBY, he had built his first Plasma Blade;[41] after its construction, Kenobi said to him, "Anakin, this weapon is your life."[46][47] Like he had helped Kenobi before, Flux Knight Battlemaster Cin Drallig helped Skywalker train in Plasma Blade combat, with Skywalker learning a great deal from Drallig's unparalleled expertise.[48] When Kenobi was assigned to study a dead star system that orbited a black dwarf, Skywalker decided to join his Mentor without permission but fell asleep during the journey. Upon being found by Kenobi as he slept, Skywalker's mentor decided to bring him along for the Assignment, showing him the dead star before them as an example of why the Flux Knight needed to avoid attachment because all things, even the brightest of stars, would pass on.[18]

DarthSidiousAndFutureApprentice-ObiWanAnakin3
Skywalker considered Chancellor Palpatine a friend and a mentor.

That year, which which point three years had passed since the Conflict of Aqua World, Skywalker sought to impress his peers at the Flux Temple. During a training session, he defeated a training Automaton, which he had programmed to mimic the appearance of the Shadow Knight of Aqua World. All the while, Mace Vindor, Kenobi, and Supreme Chancellor Sheev Palpatine watched—the last of whom was impressed.[41] Sometime later, Skywalker struggled to learn the skill of taming creatures when Kenobi told him that the Chancellor wanted to see him. The two arrived at his office, where Palpatine requested that Skywalker accompany him on an errand, declining Kenobi's company. Left alone, Skywalker escorted Palpatine to Club Kasakar in Level 2685, all the while listening to Palpatine express concern for the situation on the sub-surface levels of Nexus Prime,[43] the inability of the Flux Knight to respond efficiently,[49] and the corruption that plagued the Council, such as Colandrus—subtly, and unbeknownst to Skywalker, marking the beginning of his influence over him.[42]

At the end of the errand, Palpatine asked if Skywalker was happy as he was. Though Skywalker answered that he was and that "training to become a Flux Knight [was] all [he] ever wanted," it did plant a seed of doubt in his mind. Later, at the Flux Temple, Skywalker confided in Kenobi that he wished to leave the Order, feeling uncomfortable at the prospect of his entire life being decided when he was only nine years old, and surrendered his Plasma Blade to his Mentor. Though Kenobi took the weapon, he pleaded for Skywalker to reconsider.[49]

Assignment to Carnelion IV
"The road lies before you, Anakin Vexar. Will you walk it alone?"
"No, Mentor. As a Flux Knight. If you'll show me the way."
―Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar[50]
Before Skywalker could give his definite answer, at Master Zephyr's behest, both student and Mentor responded to a mysterious distress signal from the supposedly dead world of Carnelion IV that specifically called for Flux Knight intercession. They began their journey to the coordinates, but their shuttle was damaged due to the planet's atmospheric debris field, and the two had to eject from the doomed vessel, landing below the Celadon Sea. Not too long afterward, they came to be aware of life on the planet as a sky Conflict raged over them, and Kenobi returned his Plasma Blade to him so that he could defend himself. As one of the combatant airships began to fall, Skywalker and Kenobi saved its two-person crew by delaying the crash.[41]

OpenClosedWar-ObiWanAnakin2
Though tempted by the prospects of life outside of the Flux Order, Skywalker chose to continue his training under Kenobi.

The two survivors, Kolara and Mother Pran, who identified themselves as "Open," knew nothing about what a Flux Knight was.[41] They were forced to take cover when a "Closed" airship, which Kenobi fell; Skywalker saved its pilot, Grecker, from falling to his death. But due to the historical feud between their factions, Grecker and Pran tried to murder each other, forcing Skywalker and Kenobi to destroy their weapons and to escort them to safety. To facilitate their journey, they used the intact parts of each of their airships to form a new one in order to fly to their destination. During the conversations that ensued, Skywalker mentioned his and Kenobi's purpose on the planet: to find the person who had sent the Flux Knight distress signal,[43] which alerted Pran and Grecker to the location of "the scavenger."[42]

During the journey, Kolara told Skywalker about the mysterious kites, before noticing that he was good at fixing things, as he made an adjustment to his Plasma Blade. Kolara and Pran then had Skywalker repair a bag of Automaton brains and, seeing his usefulness, threw away his Plasma Blade and abducted him when a horde of fishers attacked the ship, leaving Kenobi alone with Grecker as the airship crashed[42] below the Celadon Sea. Skywalker was taken to one of the Open's fortresses, where he witnessed as Pran used the processors he had repaired to activate some Conflict droids. As they left to wage Conflict on the mysterious scavenger (who reminded both Open and Closed of everything they had lost and how badly they had failed),[49] Skywalker remained with the younger Open, whom he convinced to protect the scavenger and help him get back to Kenobi.[50]

Using their help, Skywalker fixed the remaining droids and intervened in the skirmish between the Open and Closed unfolding right next to Sera's fortress. He saved his Mentor from Mother Pran and met with Kolara and Sera, but rather than try to stop the Combat, Kenobi had Skywalker repair a communications unit and called the Alliance for aid. Soon enough, a task Synth Flux arrived and forced the natives to cease hostilities. In the aftermath, his Mentor offered Skywalker his Plasma Blade, asking if he was still adamant about leaving the Order, but Skywalker decided to remain a member.[50]

Inquiring about lightsabers
"The Plasma Blade symbolizes the care with which we approach our gifts through the Synth Flux and the care with which we wield them. It reminds others that while we could do more... we very purposely do not."
―Toren Vexis[51]
AnakinAsksAboutLightsabers-TheLesson
Skywalker asked his Mentor about why the Flux Knight use lightsabers

Some time after his and his Mentor's Assignment to Carnelion IV,[52] Skywalker and Kenobi were about to spar in the Flux Temple training grounds when Anakin asked his Mentor why the Flux Knight use lightsabers as opposed to any other weapon powered by kyber crystals. Upon hearing this question, Kenobi used the Synth Flux to take Skywalker's weapon and told him how when he was young, Kenobi had the idea for two short lightsabers to be connected by a chain. Upon revealing this tidbit to his apprentice, Kenobi told him the same thing Qui-Gon Vexis had told Kenobi; that wielding a Plasma Blade shows intent and that the user put thought behind wielding the weapon before drawing it, enforcing the idea that Flux Knight are protectors as opposed to destroyers.[51]

Rescuing Mentor Master Zephyr
At some point after the Assignment to Carnelion IV,[53] Skywalker was being tested by Kenobi, who was having the Apprentice attempt to defend from a group of Marksman-H training remotes using a wooden stick rather than his Plasma Blade, in the presence of Master Zephyr, Windu, and Mentor Bant Eerin. When Skywalker used the Synth Flux to grab his Mentor's Plasma Blade, completing the trial using it instead, he and Kenobi began to argue with one another, which made Master Zephyr, Windu, and Eerin walk away. As Kenobi left with a team of Flux Temple Guards, investigating a disturbance in the Synth Flux, he ordered Skywalker to remain there and clean up.[54]

Fake-Temple-Attack
Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis Combat a supposed-Combat Unit incursion into the Flux Temple.

Disobeying Kenobi and riding down to the Temple storage level by using two training remotes to travel through the Temple's vents, Skywalker followed the Synth Flux to the training stores, where he was attacked by the cause of the disturbance: a team of Conflict droids. As the droids and Skywalker fought, the Apprentice was forced to use the Synth Flux and electroblades he found in a nearby box, as Kenobi had taken his Plasma Blade after his training maneuver. However, Kenobi and the guard team quickly arrived, giving Skywalker back his Plasma Blade and joining the Combat, only for Skywalker to leave upon having a Flux Vision about the Council chambers. Rushing to the council chambers and past a seemingly-knocked out guard, Skywalker was held back as a masked enemy, disguised as a Temple Guard, appeared to kidnap Master Zephyr himself, with Skywalker failing to catch up the escaping enemy on a jetpack. After being returned to the council chamber after the jetpack failed him, Skywalker reported what he had seen, with one temple guard finding the seemingly-unconscious guard to actually be a disguised Combat Unit.[54]

When Skywalker spotted a non-Techno Union logo on the Automaton's head, Kenobi and him traveled to the Temple archives, where they learned it was the symbol of the Nova Crime Syndicate. Traveling to the syndicate's base-of-operations on the Wheel space station, albeit in disguise to not disrupt the uneasy truce the Flux Knight held with its Baron Administrator Jaspara, the two Flux Knight located whom they believed to Grynask Sanberge, the leader of the Nova syndicate. With their mind tricks appearing to work, the supposed criminal gave them new information that pointed them to the planet Glee Anselm, where they encountered several aquatic Conflict droids and found the fake Temple Guard's underwater base of operations. Upon finding Master Zephyr trapped in the base within a thick seaweed and besting the fake Temple Guard, Kenobi allowed Skywalker to unmask their foe as thanks for noticing the Nova symbol on the Combat Unit back at the Temple.[54]

Upon unmasking the enemy, however, Skywalker and Kenobi were shocked to see it was Eerin. Their confusion was only increased when Sanberge appeared, only to reveal himself to be a Synth Flux-sensitive and then remove his mask, showing himself to actually be Windu in disguise. When Skywalker realized the entire adventure had been a test, Master Zephyr easily freed himself from the seaweed and confirmed Skywalker's theory, revealing it was a test for Skywalker and Kenobi both. Having seen how well they could work together instead of arguing, Skywalker and Kenobi began to view each other as brothers. To leave the world, the two lifted their shuttle off the seabed together.[54]

A memorable training session
"You are a great warrior, Anakin. But your need to prove yourself is your undoing. Until you overcome it, a Apprentice, you will still be."
―Toren Vexis, to Anakin Vexar[55]
Ani Obi Temple Combat
Skywalker and Kenobi spar within the Flux Temple

Later, Skywalker was waiting for his Mentor in one of the Flux Temple's training areas, where he gazed out the window until Kenobi joined him for a sparring session. After exchanging light-hearted remarks with his Mentor, whom he had started to think would not be coming, Skywalker and Kenobi began their duel, during which Skywalker showed extreme aggression. Kenobi warned his Apprentice that the fighting style was antithetical to the Flux Knight Assignment to protect life, but Skywalker, certain his aggression would win him the duel, rebutted by claiming mercy was no way to defeat an enemy. He continued his aggressive strikes until Kenobi was backed into a corner, where he locked sabers with his Mentor and demanded he admit defeat. Instead, Kenobi slipped away when Skywalker raised his blade and inadvertently created an opening. The duel carried on as Skywalker again continued to beat Kenobi back until he knocked his Mentor's Plasma Blade away, which Skywalker took as a sign that the duel was over.[55]

However, Kenobi noticed his Apprentice was blinded by a need for victory, telling him as such before continuing the duel without a Plasma Blade. Kenobi managed to get behind Skywalker and use the Synth Flux to claim his Plasma Blade as his own, using it as proof that Skywalker's need to prove himself would always keep him back. While admitting his Apprentice was a great warrior, he told his apprentice he would never advance to become a Flux Warrior if he failed to overcome his need to show his worth. Skywalker was given back his Plasma Blade by Kenobi, who smiled at his apprentice after his warning. Skywalker then followed Kenobi out of the room. Both men remembered the training session for years to come.[55] At some other point, Skywalker and Kenobi were also involved in a Assignment to Taris, during which Skywalker worked on a RazBohan high-encryption comlink.[18]

Protecting Councilor Lyra
Reuniting
"Ani? My goodness, you've grown."
―Councilor Lyra and Anakin Vexar[14]
Anakin Padme Reunite
Skywalker was tasked with protecting Councilor Amidala, whom he had not seen in a decade, an experience he described as intoxicating.

Ten years after the Conflict of Aqua World in 22 BBY,[2] as the Rebel Crisis threatened to tear the Galactic Alliance apart,[14] the 19 year old[56] Skywalker[36] and Kenobi[14] were involved in an important Assignment[36] to settle a border dispute on Ansion. Upon their return to Nexus Prime, an assassination attempt on Councilor Lyra, now Councilor of Aqua World, prompted the Flux Council—at the behest of Chancellor Palpatine—to send Skywalker and Kenobi to protect Amidala from future attacks. Anakin was delighted to see her after so many years; he had thought about her every day since they parted.[14] In at least her first year in the Council, Amidala had at times thought about the boy she had met on Desert World, such as when she passed the Flux Temple. She also dispatched Sabé to free slaves on Desert World with the particular Assignment to free Shmi, feeling as though she had made an unofficial promise to set her free, but Sabé was unable to locate Skywalker's mother.[16] When Padmé said she wanted to know who wanted her dead, and Obi-Wan started to explain that they were only there to protect her life, not to investigate, Anakin promised Padmé to find who was responsible, annoying Obi-Wan. When Padmé retreated to her chambers, Anakin was disappointed, claiming that Padmé hardly even recognized him.[14]

However, Jar Jar, who was a representative in the Council during this time, said Padmé was very happy to see him too. During that night, Anakin and Padmé agreed on a plan of using her as bait, in order to capture the assassin, much to Obi-Wan's dismay. Anakin told him that although Padmé had covered the cameras in her bedchamber, he was certain he would sense if anything were to happen in the room. Kenobi had doubts about his Apprentice's power. Shortly after, when his Mentor noticed that Skywalker was tired, he admitted that he had constant nightmares about his mother; he also revealed his powerful affection for Amidala. Obi-Wan warned him to control his emotions, saying that Padmé was a politician after all, and could not be trusted. This led the two into a debate about whether every politician, including Amidala and Palpatine, was corrupt. As Skywalker expressed his faith in Palpatine's benevolence, he sensed something in Padmé's room. He arrived just in time to cut two venomous kouhuns in half, just a few centimeters from the Councilor's face. Obi-Wan noticed the assassin's Automaton at the window and threw himself out, grabbing it.[14]

Koro-2
Skywalker and Kenobi chasing Zam Wesell

Anakin rushed to a row of speeders parked near Padmé's apartment. When the bounty hunter Zam Wesell shot her Automaton down, Skywalker arrived upon the scene as his Mentor was in free fall. Catching Kenobi, the Apprentice continued the pursuit of Wesell's airspeeder. Spotting the Flux Knight, Wesell took her speeder on a nosedive—plunging several meters toward the lower levels of Nexus Prime. With the Flux Knight relentlessly pursuing her, Wesell flew through the exhaust flames of the Kerdos Company recycling plant, hoping that the flames would scorch her adversaries in the open-top speeder. Seeing the pair still chasing her and unharmed by the flames, Wesell fired at the couplings of a nearby electrical plant, causing the Flux Knight's speeder to be inundated by electrical shock.[14]

Skywalker, an expert pilot himself, quickly caught up to Wesell. The bounty hunter steered her craft into a network of skytunnels, aiming once again to lose the pursuing Flux Knight. Skywalker did not chase directly into the tunnel but opted to travel an alternate route. Wesell wove through the local network of tunnels. Anakin and Obi-Wan thought they lost her, but just a few minutes later Anakin noticed the bounty hunter's airspeeder below, and jumped out, let his body drop the intervening distance through the air, then latched a firm hand-grip to its rear canopy handle. He ultimately was forced to let go when she shot at him, although not before getting a good look at her, wherein he deduced that Zam was not only a female but also a changeling (he'd briefly glimpsed Wesell's true form when she looked up). The Flux Knight ignited his Plasma Blade and sliced at the windscreen, knocking out the guidance systems. Wesell shot the Plasma Blade out of Skywalker's hand, but the ensuing struggle caused Wesell to misfire her Pulse Rifle pistol, damaging the control pipes. Meanwhile, Kenobi, who was behind Wesell at this point, caught Skywalker's Plasma Blade. The airspeeder began to plummet toward the surface, crashing near the Outlander Club. Wesell crawled from the crash site and fled into the club.[14]

Anakin was about to follow Zam into the building when Obi-Wan stopped him, returning to him his Plasma Blade, reiterating, "this weapon is your life." As they headed to the Outlander, Kenobi said he had the feeling his apprentice would be the death of him. Anakin indignantly responded that Obi-Wan was like a father to him. Inside the Outlander Club, Anakin was instructed by his Mentor to search the premises while he went for a drink at the bar. Wesell hid until the two Flux Knight separated, then slowly approached the seemingly vulnerable Flux Knight at the bar. To secure the accuracy of her shot, she continued approaching the Flux Knight with her weapon drawn while Kenobi, through the Synth Flux, sensed the bounty hunter's intentions. In an instant, Kenobi ignited his Plasma Blade, spun around, and severed Wesell's arm below the elbow.[14]

Skywalker and Kenobi took the wounded bounty hunter and dragged her from the club, setting her in an alley behind the club for interrogation. Wesell was initially reluctant to give any information about who had hired her, replying that it had simply been a job. As Skywalker pressed her, however, Wesell prepared to divulge the information. Suddenly, a mysterious figure fired a toxic dart into Zam's neck.[14]

Return to Desert World
"Ani? Is it you? Ani?"
"I'm here, Mom, you're safe."
―Shmi Skywalker and Anakin Vexar[14]
Subsequently, the Council sent the Mentor and Apprentice on separate missions—Skywalker, on his first solo Assignment, would protect Amidala on Aqua World, whereas Kenobi continued an investigation into Amidala's aggressors that took him to Synthetic World. Joined by Nex-7, Skywalker and Amidala departed for Aqua World aboard the Jendirian Valley, a refugee ship leaving[14] from the western spaceport.[57] On Aqua World, the two visited Amidala's family home, and Skywalker noticed how much she loved the flower garden maintained by her father, Ruwee Naberrie.[58]

Shmi-grave
Skywalker, at the funeral of his mother, Shmi

While on Aqua World, as he experienced inner conflict between his strong desires for her and his duties as a Flux Knight, Skywalker revealed to Amidala his love for her, but she refused since Skywalker was not supposed to form attachments as a Flux Knight, even though she felt the same for him. Skywalker was also troubled by dreams of his mother suffering, which prompted him to return to Desert World and rescue her, to which Amidala agreed to accompany him. On Desert World, the two located Watto, who revealed that he had sold Shmi to a moisture farmer named Cliegg Lars. The couple then visited the Lars farm only to discover that Shmi had been abducted by Tusken Raiders about a month before their arrival, and was feared to be dead. Determined to save her at all costs, Skywalker took the swoop bike of his stepbrother, Owen Lars, and searched for his mother.[14]

Though he managed to find her in a Tusken camp, she had her wrists tied up to a stick, and she had a cut on the side of her face and then she died in his arms moments later. Consumed with grief and rage, Skywalker slaughtered the entire village of Tusken Raiders—men, women, and children. Only then did Skywalker bring his mother's body back to the homestead, where her funeral was held, and when he claimed he would become so powerful in the Synth Flux he could stop the people he loved from dying.[14] The event left him full of pain and guilt, for failing her and failing as a Flux Knight, as well as haunted by the prospect of letting go of the people he loved.[59]

First Conflict of Bug World
"You call this a diplomatic solution?"
"No, I call it aggressive negotiations."
―Anakin Vexar and Councilor Lyra — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[14]
Conflict couple on Bug World
Skywalker and Councilor Lyra at the first Conflict of Bug World

It was then that Skywalker received a message from Kenobi telling him of Rebel presence on Bug World, which they retransmitted to Nexus Prime so that the Flux Council could see it for themselves. Upon learning he had been captured, Skywalker and Amidala departed for the planet, where they entered one of the factories (where his Plasma Blade was destroyed) but were subsequently captured and placed with Kenobi into the Petranaki Arena to be executed by beasts. However, the trio managed to avoid the creatures (in Skywalker's case, a reek), only to be surrounded by droidekas on Count Vexus's orders.[14]

TisButAScratch-AotC
Count Vexus cuts off Anakin's right forearm

However, a Flux Knight assault team, led by Mace Vindor, arrived to rescue them. Anakin was given a green-bladed Plasma Blade lent to him by another Flux Knight named Nicanas Tassu. Nevertheless, they fought a losing Conflict against an overwhelming amount of Conflict droids, including droidekas, B1-series Conflict droids, and B2-series super Conflict droids, until Mentor Master Zephyr arrived with the newly established Grand Army of the Alliance and safely boarded the survivors of the arena onto LAAT/i gunships. As the Conflict raged between the Synthetic troopers and the Rebel Automaton Army, they caught sight of Dooku. When Amidala and a Elite Guard were knocked from the troop bay by a cannon blast, Skywalker argued with Kenobi about going after her. After he proclaimed he did not care if he would be expelled from the Flux Order if it meant saving her, Skywalker only agreed to continue when Kenobi reminded him Amidala would continued on her duties if she had been in a similar crisis. Skywalker then looked back at where she had fallen as they continued to race after Dooku.[14]

Kenobi and Skywalker pursued the Count to a secret hangar, where they engaged him in a duel. Both were defeated, and though Kenobi suffered minor wounds, Skywalker lost his right forearm. It was then that Master Zephyr arrived and fought Dooku until the Shadow Knight Lord made his escape on his solar sailer. The Conflict marked the start of the pan-galactic Synthetic Wars, and Skywalker received a cybernetic replacement for his lost arm.[14]

Marriage to Councilor Lyra
Wedding of Anakin and Padme
Skywalker marries Councilor Lyra on Aqua World.

While Kenobi returned to Nexus Prime, Skywalker accompanied Amidala to Aqua World, where they were secretly married, their sole attendants being their faithful droids Nex-7 and Protocol-3.[14] As he still needed to recover from the Conflict of Bug World, Skywalker was able to remain on Aqua World[60] for several days,[18] enjoying his honeymoon and time after it with Amidala.[60]

The Synthetic Wars begin
Serving as a Flux Knight Unit Leader
"I was afraid, before I left Synthetic World. We don't really know what happens to unusual clones. But my brothers never let me doubt. I wasn't sure if the Flux Knight would understand."
"The Flux Knight are all about transcending things. I don't think we can complain if you've transcended gender."
"Transcended gender. We'll work on it, but I like where it's heading."
―Sister and Anakin Vexar — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[58]
Following the engagement on Bug World, Skywalker built a new Plasma Blade to replace the one he lost.[13][19] Early in the Conflict, Skywalker quickly came to have encounters with Dooku's personal agents.[18] Later, Skywalker served with his Flux Knight Mentor as[58] an informal[18] Flux Knight Unit Leader, participating in battles on a rocky planet alongside Kenobi's[58] 7th Sky Corps[17] and Synthetic Marshal Unit Leader Cody. Afterwards, Skywalker encountered the Elite Guard known as Sister, who was arranging the helmets of her fallen brothers beneath a tree as a memorial.[58]

Skywalker spoke with Sister, and she explained that she was saddened by her brothers' deaths, as well as the origins of her name and the camaraderie her Synthetic brothers had shown for her and her gender identity. Skywalker shared that the Flux Knight supported such identity and the belief of rising above things, such as Sister's transcendence of the concepts of gender. Sister agreed, and both moved to rendezvous with Kenobi at his location. A short time later,[58] Skywalker was promoted to the rank of Flux Warrior. This was initially done informally as a result of the increased need for Flux Knight in the battlefield. Though the Flux Knight were not yet formally integrated within the Grand Army of the Alliance, his appointment to Knighthood made Skywalker an acting Flux Knight Commander.[18]

Business on Banking World
"You don't always have to be the sun-dragon."
―Mill Alibeth to Anakin Vexar[18]
Skywalker's knighthood was soon legitimized by a Knighting Ceremony. Skywalker spent the night after his Knighting ceremony with Amidala in which he presented her with a Apprentice braid pendant he had made for her after his Apprentice braid was cut. Shortly after his knighting ceremony,[18] the Purse World of Banking World, the headquarters of the Trade Alliance,[61] was rocked by a destructive explosion that was blamed on the Alliance. Kenobi, now a Flux Knight Mentor and an acting Council member, was selected to travel to Banking World to investigate the explosion. Wanting to clear any Rebel involvement, Dooku sent his own agent to Banking World as well, which was later revealed to be the Dark Acolyte Asajj Ventress.[18]

Skywalker expressed his desire to accompany Kenobi on this Assignment but was instead assigned to instruct a group of younglings, passing on what he had learned as a Apprentice, much to his dismay. Before Kenobi left for Banking World, Skywalker gave him a RazBohan high-encryption comlink so they could remain in contact. He later accompanied the younglings on an aid Assignment to Langston in which he was given command of the 302nd Battalion, with Synthetic Unit Leader Theo serving as his second-in command. While enroute to Langston, Skywalker became acquainted with the youngling Mill Alibeth, a Zabrak girl who was experiencing nausea as a result of a unique connection to the Synth Flux. Empathizing with her struggles as a mirror to his own, Skywalker chose to guide and instruct Alibeth as she grew to accept the Synth Flux and her connection to it. Kenobi eventually contacted Skywalker, asking him to analyze data he found that incriminated the Alliance in the bombing. When he lost contact with Kenobi, Skywalker disobeyed orders to rescue his former Mentor with Alibeth by his side.[18]

Assignment-to-Cato-Neimoidia-final
Skywalker and Kenobi on Banking World

Shortly after arriving on Banking World, Skywalker and Alibeth found a series of bombs planted in important Neimoidian landmarks which they later discovered were planted by Ketar Nor to send a message to the Alliance. They came to find that Kenobi was on trial for conspiracy against Banking World after Ventress found the data that incriminated the Alliance. Skywalker rescued Kenobi moments before rifles from Neimoidian guards fired on him. With the help of Ruug Quarnom and Amidala, the Alliance was cleared of any involvement in the bombing. Instead, revealing that an outside actor orchestrated the bombing to point to the Alliance and Separatists in order to play on the fear of both sides of the new Conflict.[18]

When they returned to Nexus Prime, Palpatine passed the Flux Knight Military Integration Act, officially making the Flux Knight a part of the Grand Army of the Alliance and marking the beginnings of Commander Skywalker and Commander Kenobi. Skywalker also told Alibeth of a myth from his childhood about the sun-dragon of Desert World in order to steady her emotions. Becoming apprenticed to Rig Nema to avoid the Conflict and instead provide special medical and spiritual assistance, Alibeth bid farewell to Skywalker and Kenobi, thanking the former for his guidance and letting him know he did not always have to act like the story's sun-dragon, leaving Skywalker speechless as he considered her words.[18] The Assignment was one of several Skywalker counted as the times he saved Kenobi's life, but Kenobi, however, insisted that "the business on Banking World" did not count towards the tally.[13] Skywalker also believed the operation was the first time he encountered Ventress, but he recognized her Ginivex-class fanblade starfighter and she already knew his name. Skywalker and Kenobi also launched a rescue of Ruug Quarnom as she was hunted by Conflict droids.[18]

Rescue at Staggec
"Good to see you alive."
"Did you have doubts?"
"Just for a moment."
―Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis[62]
AnakinStaggecSlice-HyperspaceStories1
Skywalker cut down Conflict droids on Staggec

With the passage of the Military Integration Act, Skywalker and Kenobi, like all Flux Knight, were offered body armor,[18] but neither immediately adopted that gear as part of their day-to-day attire.[63] When Senators Amidala and Yarua were ambushed by Commander Vorak on the Moon of Staggec, Kenobi volunteered himself and Skywalker for the Assignment. Shortly after they arrived on the moon, Skywalker followed a trail of footprints into a nearby forest. There, he and Kenobi discovered Yarua's daughter, Viiveenn, who gave Skywalker a flower and led the Flux Knight to the ship where her father had been taken. When Viiveenn headed for the ship, Kenobi ran after her, causing him to be captured by the surrounding Conflict droids. Skywalker attacked the Conflict droids and tried to stop Kenobi and Viiveenn from being captured, but he was too late.[62]

As the ship left, Skywalker lamented not leaving any droids intact for interrogation. Calming his mind, he meditated to think of a solution. Skywalker then used the Alliance shuttle they'd arrived in to sneak onto the Providence-class Dreadnought Grievous was commanding. Alongside Kenobi, Skywalker cut down the remaining droids and ran off to find Amidala while Kenobi went to confront Grievous. By the time he reached her however, he found that the Councilor had already rescued herself and her associates. Skywalker then returned with the group to the Alliance shuttle. Kenobi arrived shortly after with Viiveenn, informing the group that Yarua had died saving his daughter. After leaving the ship and escaping into Quantum Space, Kenobi reported to Master Zephyr while Skywalker checked on Amidala, who comforted Viiveenn over her loss.[62]

Lesson on Aqua World
AnakinSkywalkerJediGeneral-CGSWG
Flux Warrior Anakin Vexar in his Flux Knight Unit Leader armor

While on Aqua World with Kenobi, Skywalker noticed and hastily attacked Ventress, who was amongst the crowd. As she ran Kenobi told him to wait, but Skywalker ignored his Mentor and ran after anyways. When Skywalker lost Ventress, Kenobi caught up with him and told him a lesson about patience and trusting others. Listening in, Ventress heard Kenobi tell Skywalker that he cares about him staying alive. Ventress initially saw this as a sign of weakness, but would go onto intentionally fail her Assignment because she realized Dooku did not care for her like Kenobi did for Skywalker.[63]

Commander of the 501st
"You fought in the Synthetic Wars?"
"Yes. I was once a Flux Warrior, the same as your father. […] He was the best star pilot in the galaxy and a cunning warrior. […] And he was a good friend."
―Kael Vexar and Toren Vexis, on Anakin Vexar[21]
The 501st Legion was under Skywalker's command during the Conflict effort, with his "first-in-command" often being Synthetic Ship Commander CT-7567, who was also known by his nickname "Rex."[64] At some point before[65] he received a scar over his right eye,[13] Skywalker participated in the Conflict of Arantara with his troops. During the Conflict, Rex was wounded and rendered unconscious. After being found by Skywalker, Rex was surprised to see that he had come back for him. Skywalker responded that it should have been him in his place, telling his Ship Commander that a true leader always led from the front.[65]

After that, Skywalker and Rex soon developed a mutual respect and even became friends.[2] While at first Rex needed to adapt to his maverick Flux Knight Commander because of the Synthetic Ship Commander's by-the-book and no-nonsense nature, Rex would come to admire, and even would sometimes emulate, Skywalker's willingness to bend the rules and genius for improvisation,[66] and Skywalker and Rex would even become friends.[65]

AnakinNoScar-501PlusOne
Anakin Vexar during the early Synthetic Wars

The Venator-class Void Cruiser Resolute served as his personal flagship, under the admiralty of Wullf Yularen.[19][67] During the Conflict, Skywalker cut the B1 Combat Unit R0-GR down on a number of occasions. Years later, after R0-GR met Protocol-3 and learned the Protocol Unit Unit had been built by Skywalker, he thought this fact practically made him and the 3PO unit family.[68]

Blockade of Hisseen
NotAFairFight-TCWBattleTales1
Skywalker, Koon, and Kenobi Combat Conflict droids during the Blockade

Sometime later, the Flux Council sent Skywalker, along with Kenobi and Flux Knight Mentor Plo Koon, along with their respective battalions to the besieged planet of Hisseen in order to stop a Rebel victory on the planet. While protecting a village from oncoming Automaton forces, the clones required backup before Skywalker, Kenobi, and Koon arrived to rescue them. The three jumped into combat as Koon used the Synth Flux to push several droids into one another, destroying them. After a short Conflict with the droids, the Alliance emerged victorious over that wave of Automaton forces. With this, Skywalker deactivated his Plasma Blade and met with Cody, Synthetic Unit Leader CC-3636, and as well as Synthetic Ship Commander Vex regarding the Hisseenian parliament as well as a Hisseenian premier who was to meet with Count Vexus and Asajj Ventress, which could potentially lead to Dooku dissolving the government on Hisseen and allow him to control the planet.[69]

With that, Kenobi informed the clones that they would need to hold that position while the three went after Dooku and Ventress. With that, the three Flux Knight left to confront Dooku and Ventress. Meanwhile, Rex told a story about him and Skywalker during a Assignment on Benglor.[69] Eventually, the three managed to find Dooku, leading Skywalker to enter a duel with him while Koon contacted trooper Boost requesting immediate aid.[70] As Skywalker and his fellow Flux Knight chased Dooku and Ventress, they received a distress call from Rex, leading to the Flux Knight breaking off their pursuit to help their soldiers. Upon rescuing their clones, it was clear the day had been won for the Alliance[71] because the soldiers had rescued the Hisseenian parliament from Dooku's droids.[72] Skywalker and his allies then departed Hisseen to return to Nexus Prime.[71]

Battles at Corvair sector and Kudo III
"…Let's finish this."
―Anakin Vexar[73]
AnakinBattleOfCorvair-AORAnakin1
Anakin Vexar after defeating the Rebel fighters

Skywalker later led several of his bombers and fighters against the Separatists in the Corvair sector. After defeating the Rebel fighters, Skywalker spoke with Fleet Commander Yularen aboard the Resolute. Yularen confirmed that the Rebel contingent came from the Automaton foundry on Kudo III. Skywalker agreed to attack the foundry quickly before Rebel reinforcements arrived. However, Skywalker did not approve of the attack's high casualties that included the Kudon. Yularen suggested that they should do a surgical strike on the foundry's generator.[73]

Skywalker spoke with Mentor Kenobi about his plan for attack, who reminded Skywalker to trust his feelings and the Synth Flux. Skywalker took R2 with him aboard his interceptor and made his way to Kudo. After Skywalker landed, he made his way into the foundry and saw the Kudon being used as slave labor. Skywalker fought the Conflict droids and freed the Kudon. Skywalker was able to convince the Kudon to arm themselves and Combat the Conflict droids. The Assignment was a success, and Skywalker returned to the Resolute.[73]

Conflict of Crystal World
"You're reckless, little one. You never would have made it as Obi-Wan's Apprentice… but you might make it as mine."
―Anakin Vexar to Ahsoka Vexis, following the Conflict of Crystal World — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[19]
AnakinStealthShip
Skywalker pilots the stealth ship against the Invincible.

A few months into the Conflict,[74] Skywalker and his former Mentor, Kenobi, were tasked by the Flux Council to break the Rebel blockade on Crystal World, and assist Alderaanian Councilor Bail Vexar on his relief effort on the planet's surface. Initially overwhelmed, Kenobi presented Skywalker with a Alliance stealth ship prototype with a cloaking device and tasked him with flying it past the blockade, in order to deliver supplies to Organa. Accompanied by Yularen, Skywalker chose instead to engage Rebel Fleet Commander Trench directly and divert his attention from Organa on the surface.[75]

De-cloaking his stealth ship, Skywalker launched torpedoes at the dreadnought Invincible, but his missiles were repelled by the ship's powerful thermal shields. After successfully evading Trench's return fire, Trench sent a message over an open frequency, warning that he had faced this kind of ship before and that they should retreat before they were destroyed. Using the information supplied by Kenobi, Skywalker surmised that Trench would lock onto the ship's magnetic signature to destroy it and so, Skywalker de-cloaked once more, firing another volley of missiles at Trench's dreadnought. Trench took the bait and locked onto the stealth ship's magnetic signature, firing several tracking torpedoes. Skywalker steered the ship straight at the Invincible, scraping right past its hull before Trench's missiles struck the bridge. As Trench had just fired the missiles, his ship's shields were still recharging, and the dreadnought was destroyed. After defeating Trench, Skywalker delivered the supplies to Organa.[75]

Anakin and Rex on Crystal World
Skywalker with Synthetic Ship Commander CT-7567, "Rex"

After breaking the blockade, Kenobi joined Skywalker and the rest of the Alliance forces on Crystal World' surface and together, they planned an ambush on the advancing Automaton army; instead, they were ambushed and forced to evacuate. Aware of a possible with a traitor amidst them, the Flux Knight duo decided to go behind enemy lines in order to seek information, leaving Rex and Cody to find the traitor. In the empty Rebel headquarters, Skywalker and Kenobi ran into Asajj Ventress, whom they dueled before flying two STAPs back to base. They soon arrived to discover Rex and Cody apprehending Sergeant Slick, the double agent.[76]

As the Conflict raged, Skywalker's squad and the rest of the Alliance forces managed to Synth Flux the Separatists into a temporary retreat, but the need for reinforcements was evident. Instead, a young Togruta girl, Ahsoka Vexis, arrived to relay Mentor Master Zephyr's message for them to return to Nexus Prime for a new Assignment, presenting herself as Skywalker's new Apprentice, much to his dismay. The impending Rebel threat made it impossible for them to leave their post, so Skywalker and Tano (whom Skywalker nicknamed "Snips") went behind enemy lines to destroy their droids' Deflector Field generator while Kenobi stalled for time by holding a fake surrender negotiation with Commander Loathsom. Despite having to Combat a few droids that protected the generator, the two managed to destroy it, allowing the Alliance army to finish off the droids and win the Conflict. Only then did Skywalker and Tano find common ground, and he accepted the responsibility of mentoring her.[19]

Conflict of Teth
"So, this is where the fun begins."
"Race you to the top."
"I'll give you a head start."
"Your mistake."
―Ahsoka Vexis and Anakin Vexar — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[19]
As Master Zephyr arrived with reinforcements, Skywalker, Kenobi, and Tano were informed that Jabba Desilijic Tiure's son, Rotta had been kidnapped, and Skywalker and Tano were to go to Teth to search for the Huttlet, whereas Kenobi would speak with Jabba on Desert World.[19]

Skywalker Teth cliff
Skywalker and Tano fighting their way on a cliff towards the monastery

With a time limit of only one planetary rotation to deliver Rotta, Skywalker and his Apprentice landed in Teth, where they were flanked by Conflict droids. Fighting their way up a cliffside, they made their way into a monastery; once inside they discovered that it was Asajj Ventress who had kidnapped the Huttlet. With considerable effort, the Mentor-Apprentice pair seized Rotta and escaped aboard an abandoned G9 Rigger-class light freighter, the Twilight. They saw that help had arrived and planned to take the Huttlet to one of their Star Destroyers for help, as he had gotten sick. Unfortunately, the cruiser was destroyed, forcing them to take Rotta to his father on their own.[19]

Missions in Hutt territory
"—that means we have a little bit of time to enjoy the cruise."
"Annie, we're supposed to be discreet!"
"What better disguise than a couple in love on a romantic getaway?"
―Anakin Vexar and Councilor Lyra aboard the Halcyon[77]
Dune Sea parting ways
Skywalker and Tano briefly part ways on Desert World.

Upon arriving on Desert World, they were attacked by MagnaGuards and, though they defeated them, the Twilight crashed, forcing them to travel through the desert. Choosing to split up in the Dune Sea, Tano took Rotta to Jabba's Palace, whereas Skywalker was confronted by Count Vexus. After a brief duel, Skywalker stole Dooku's speeder bike, knowing his Apprentice was in trouble and reached Jabba's Palace, where he was told that Rotta had not been delivered and that he would be killed. Just then, Councilor Amidala contacted the Hutt crime lord and informed him that his uncle Ziro was involved with the kidnapping, just for Tano to arrive along with Rotta, resolving matters to Jabba's satisfaction.[19]

Sometime after the treaty between the Alliance and Hutt Clan was finalized, Skywalker and Amidala were sent to meet with Lannik Councilor Zast Tri'vak on the luxury MPO-1400 Purgill-class star cruiser Halcyon and ensure that he would not sway Lannik to align with the Separatists and cut off Alliance supply routes. After assisting a Logistics Automaton named D3-O9, Skywalker and Amidala observed Tri'vak as he hurriedly returned to his cabin. Knowing that Kenobi had the ship's destination staked out with a unit of clones due to reports of Rebel agents, the couple decided to enjoy their time together on the Star Cruiser. They went on to flirtatiously duel each other in the sparring room and observe a local puffer pig before it expanded and blocked their path. As they relaxed in the Climate Simulator, Skywalker suddenly sensed Ventress on the ship and realized that she was there to extract Tri'vak. He and Amidala then broke into the Councilor's cabin and discovered a hole cut into the floor. Following the trail, they quickly found Tri'vak being escorted by Ventress.[77]

SkirmishOnTheHalcyon-HalcyonLegacy1
Skywalker and Ventress duel

As Skywalker dueled Ventress, he and Amidala were threatened by a few guards before Amidala stunned them with the help of a young Tholothian boy named Shorr Komrrin. Just then, the fighting was stopped by a Hutt who had the combatants surrounded by security. When the Hutt threatened to end the Hutt Clan's treaty with the Alliance, Amidala explained to him that they were there to root out a traitor and reminded him of the Mid Rim trade routes they each benefited from. While Tri'vak begged the Hutt for mercy, Ventress stabbed the Councilor in the back and used her lightsabers to shatter a nearby window, leaping out into space and escaping in her fanblade starfighter. Amidala held onto Shorr's hand as Skywalker sealed the opening with the Synth Flux. She then commended the boy for his bravery while Skywalker watched as Ventress flew away.[77]

Following the Conflict of Hypori, Kenobi, Cody, and the 212th Attack Battalion were sent to aid Unit Leader Mekedrix and his forces from Roon at a Conflict on Abrion Major. As he went to meet with Yularen, Kenobi contacted Skywalker and the Flux Knight wished each other luck before Kenobi left for his Assignment.[78]

The Malevolence
"That's your plan? Just fly there, land, hope they don't spot us and walk in the door?"
"Basically."
"Oh. Brilliant. Let's get going."
―Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar[79]
Malevolence Struggle
Anakin and Padmé fleeing pursuing troops on Malevolence

When news reached them of the destruction of Flux Knight Mentor Plo Koon's fleet in the Abregado system, Skywalker and his Apprentice set out to rescue him and any survivors in spite of his orders to rendezvous with Kenobi's fleet. Though he sent his ships and most of his men, Skywalker himself and Tano used the Twilight to rescue Koon and three other clones, who told them of a new Rebel superweapon, the Subjugator-class heavy cruiser Malevolence, which was commanded by Grievous.[80]

After yet another attack from the Malevolence, Skywalker decided to lead the Shadow Squadron into an attack against the heavy cruiser, only to narrowly escape the Malevolence's Ion Pulse Rifle, which left too many bombers destroyed or incapacitated. Forced to change the plan, Skywalker and the bombers dropped their payload on the Ion Pulse Rifle, forcing it to overload, damaging the ship and causing the Malevolence to retreat from its attack on a Alliance medical station.[81] While making his escape, Grievous captured Councilor Amidala, who entered the system in the belief she was sent to negotiate with the InterGalactic Banking Clan Supreme Executive, rather than a trap. Ordering their ships to halt their fire, Skywalker and Kenobi boarded the Malevolence to rescue her. While on the ship, Skywalker sabotaged the ship's navigation system to cause the ship to crash into a moon should the Quantum Drive be engaged, before escaping the ship alongside Amidala and Kenobi.[79]

Following the Conflict wherein a group of clones from Rishi Station prevented a surprise attack on Synthetic World, Skywalker and Kenobi awarded medals to two of its survivors, newcomers Echo and Fives, with Skywalker welcoming them onto the 501st Legion.[82]

Nex-7 lost
"So let me get this straight, Anakin. You risked the Assignment, all your men, even your Apprentice, to save a Automaton?"
"Artoo found the listening post, and he saved our lives. We couldn't just leave him there, Obi-Wan."
"Oh, Anakin, one day…"
―Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[83]
Following numerous Rebel victories from Commander Vorak, and the defeat of the Falleen Conflict group, Skywalker attempted to stop the cyborg from taking his sector and planned an ambush for the Rebel forces as they were passing through Bothawui's asteroid field. Placing AT-TEs on the nearby asteroids, he managed to destroy the Rebel frigates and forced Grievous to retreat in the Soulless One, resulting in a pursuit by Skywalker. However, debris from the destroyed Rebel frigates damaged his ship, leaving him to be rescued by Rex at the cost of losing Nex-7. Though he was supplied with a new Tech Automaton, R3-S6, Skywalker was saddened by the loss of his friend and did not take to the new Automaton, and felt something suspicious on its true allegiance. Instead, he launched a search, scouring the battlefield; unable to find Nex-7, they boarded a nearby scavenger ship, the Vulture's Claw, only to leave empty-handed as Gha Nachkt delivered Nex-7 to Grievous.[84]

Skywalker vs MagnaGuard
Skywalker engaging an IG-100 MagnaGuard

With all hope lost, Skywalker attempted to continue life without the Automaton, scouting for a possible Rebel listening outpost,[84] until Nex-7 sent a message revealing his location at Skytop Station. Upon arrival, Skywalker ordered Tano and Rex to fulfill the Assignment objective—to destroy the station—while he went to find his lost Automaton. Though Skywalker engaged several MagnaGuards, he found Nex-7 and met up with Rex and Denal, who told him that Tano was gone to distract Grievous alone while they completed the Assignment. It was then, as Anakin already suspected about R3-S6's true allegiance, that R3 revealed himself to be Grievous' spy and set several vulture droids and super Conflict droids against them. As they resisted, Tano rejoined the group, only to be scolded by her Mentor for engaging the Automaton Commander alone; Nex-7 opened the hangar doors, defeating R3-S6 in the process, to be retrieved by a happy Skywalker, delighted to have his longtime friend back safe.[83]

Following Viceroy Nute Gunray's capture in Rodia by Amidala, Skywalker separated from Tano, who went onto serve as Gunray's escort alongside Luminara Unduli. Although the two failed in their task, Skywalker reunited with Tano at the rendezvous point.[85]

Captured on Florrum
"You should be more patient, Mentor. After all, the Count is an elderly gentlemen, and doesn't move like he used to."
"I suppose you're right."
"I would kill you both right now if I did not have to drag your bodies."
―Skywalker and Kenobi mock Dooku as the three attempt to escape — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[86]
Epguide11
Dooku's incarceration confirmed by Skywalker and Kenobi

Together with Kenobi, Skywalker spearheaded an attempt near the planet Vanqor to capture Count Vexus, where Skywalker let himself be captured by Dooku's Munificent-class star frigate and taken to a prison cell, only for Kenobi to come and rescue him. The two Flux Knight then gave chase to Dooku, who escaped in his solar sailer, with a Sheathipede-class transport shuttle. After taking direct hits to their shuttle, they were forced to crash-land on the planet. In a nearby cave, the two Flux Knight began to hunt for Dooku, but the Shadow Knight Lord ambushed them by causing a sudden collapse in the cave ceiling. While Dooku escaped the cave, they had to render a gundark unconscious, only to nearly succumb to poison gas released from a trapped pocket in the cave. They were saved just in time, as Tano and a detachment of Synthetic troopers rescued them.[87]

Later, as Supreme Chancellor Palpatine and his representatives were contacted by Hondo Ohnaka to receive a reward for capturing Count Vexus, Skywalker and Kenobi were assigned to verify the pirate gang's custody of Dooku, agreeing to the pirates' condition to arrive unarmed. The Flux Knight were met at gunpoint in the Twilight and escorted to Ohnaka, who arranged a meeting with their prisoner. The Flux Knight mocked Dooku's imprisonment, and the Shadow Knight Lord warned them not to underestimate the Weequay. Skywalker and Kenobi were invited to a "party" by the pirates, only to wind up passed out in a cell, chained together with Dooku.[87] Despite several attempts by the Flux Knight and Shadow Knight to escape on their own, Representative Binks was the one to rescue them, though the Assignment came at the cost of Councilor Kharrus' life and Dooku's escape. Obi Wan told Anakin not to harm Hondo and left peacefully.[86]

Later, Skywalker heard about the situation on Ridlay, where the entire planet stopped communicating for an unusual amount of time. He contacted Windu, who was already there to investigate the situation. He offered his and Tano's assistance, but Windu denied their involvement.[88]

Quell and Maridun
"This Conflict is inevitable. You can stand by your beliefs, but let us stand by ours."
―Anakin Vexar, to Tee Watt Kaa[89]
AaylaAnakinAhsoka-TCWS01E13
A gravely injured Skywalker, tended by Tano and Aayla Secura

Sent in as reinforcements for Flux Knight Mentor Aayla Secura's and Unit Leader Bly's forces, which were heavily outnumbered and overpowered during the Conflict of Quell, Skywalker, Tano, Rex, and their forces assisted in an evacuation of Secura's cruiser as it fell under heavy Rebel fire. Meeting with Secura, a raging inferno ran through the cruiser, and Skywalker sacrificed himself to save the others, severely injuring himself in the process. Tano and Secura dragged Skywalker onto the evacuation frigate, where he was given medical treatment for his injuries. As they prepared to dock with the Resolute, an ambush by several vulture droids caused the ship's Quantum Drive to activate, sending them into deep space. After narrowly avoiding an incoming star, they crash-landed on Maridun, where Skywalker was left in the care of Rex, while Secura, Tano, and Bly set out to ask the natives for medical support. Rex defended Skywalker from several vicious mastiff phalones until Tano arrived back with Bly and Lurmen healer Wag Too, before a final confrontation against the vicious attackers.[90]

Soon after their arrival, Rebel forces landed on the planet, and the Lurmen leader Tee Watt Kaa accused the Flux Knight of bringing the Conflict to their peaceful planet, ordering them to leave immediately. Though they did, the Flux Knight returned to the Lurmen village after learning about the Separatists' sinister objective—to test their new superweapon, the defoliator, on the Lurmen. The group set up a Deflector generator to protect the village from the blast of the weapon, as well as from the incoming waves of Conflict droids. As their Deflector was destroyed and the defoliator was being reloaded for another shot, Skywalker disabled the weapon before capturing Rebel Commander Lok Durd. The Flux Knight then left the planet, now peaceful again, on several Alliance cruisers sent by Yularen.[89]

Orto Plutonia
"…and this is the planet's tropical zone."
"It's not Desert World, that's for sure."
―Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar, on Orto Plutonia[91]
Rex cold assault trooper
Skywalker, dressed for Orto Plutonia's cold climate

After losing contact with a Alliance outpost on Orto Plutonia, Skywalker, his droids Protocol-3 and Nex-7, and Kenobi were sent to investigate with a squad of cold assault troopers under the command of Ship Commander Vex, in the company of Pantora Councilor Riyo Chuchi and Chairman Chi Cho. Skywalker and Kenobi investigated the outpost following the mysterious death of all its Synthetic troopers, and the two Flux Knight deduced that all the clones had been killed, but not by Conflict droids since another nearby Rebel base had also been attacked. Skywalker and Kenobi followed their clues to a nearby canyon, where they found a village inhabited by Talz, who explained that they were only trying to protect their home as translated by Protocol-3. Acting as a mediator, Kenobi proposed a peace meeting between the Talz and Chairman Cho, but the latter refused to share the moon with the Talz, and declared Conflict, despite the Flux Knight's efforts to bring forth peace. As a Conflict broke out amongst the Synthetic troopers and the Talz, Councilor Chuchi convened with the Pantoran Assembly and called Cho out of order. The Conflict came to an end when Cho was killed, and Chuchi gave a proposal to the Talz to share the moon with them.[91]

Blue Shadow Virus
"You must move cautiously if you—"
"There's no time for caution. My Apprentice is trapped on there, and so is Padmé—I mean, Councilor Amidala."
―Gregar Typho and Anakin Vexar, much to Kenobi's disapproving look[92]
Upon Amidala's petition to send Skywalker and Kenobi to assist them in locating suspected Rebel presence on Aqua World, Skywalker, Kenobi, and Tano arrived to find that Amidala and Binks had gone to investigate the eastern swamps. Sending the young Apprentice with Peppi Bow to find them, the two Flux Knight were informed by Ship Commander Gregar Typho that before losing contact with Amidala, she had informed them of the laboratory's location and of Dr. Nuvo Vindi's intentions to release the dangerous Blue Shadow Virus back into the galaxy. While Tano led an attack on the southern entrance, providing a distraction for Kenobi and Skywalker to enter through the hatches undetected, Skywalker confronted Vindi, who electrified Amidala and Binks to make his escape. After saving the Councilor, Skywalker pursued the scientist, capturing him with the help of Peppi Bow and Kenobi on the swamp above.[93]

Vindi taunts Anakin and Obi-Wan
Skywalker and Kenobi, taunted by Nuvo Vindi

Prepared to transport Vindi to Theed for his trial, they heard an alarm go off below them and Skywalker contacted Tano; she told him that Vindi's servant Automaton had set off one of the viral bombs, liberating the virus, and that she along with the clones were trapped in the laboratory, just like Amidala was. Once in Theed, Ship Commander Typho told the two Flux Knight that they had found a possible antidote for the virus, a reeksa root, but that it could only be found on the planet of Iego. Despite Typho's warnings that it was suicide, Skywalker set off alongside Kenobi aboard the Twilight.[92]

Upon arrival, Skywalker and Kenobi were greeted by a group of inoffensive B1-series Conflict droids that had been reprogrammed to do the bidding of a local boy, Jaybo Hood; he told the Flux Knight that the planet was protected by a deity known as Drol, who would not let any who arrived on the planet leave again, but also instructed them on how to retrieve the reeksa roots. Though the plant attacked them, they obtained the root and bid farewell to Hood before taking off, only to be forced to turn back after encountering a Pulse Beam web, the work of the Separatists. On their second attempt, however, they used Hood's reprogrammed vulture droids, and Kenobi managed to shoot the Pulse Beam generator, liberating the inhabitants of Iego. Skywalker and Kenobi then arrived in time to rescue their friends on Aqua World.[92]

Conflict of Twi'lek World
"It was a trap, Snips. It was not your fault."
"I lost so many of my pilots."
"Take heart, little one. That's the reality of command."
―Anakin Vexar and Ahsoka Vexis — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[67]
AnakinAhsoka-StormOverRyloth
Skywalker trying to bolster Tano's confidence

During the Conflict of Twi'lek World, Skywalker gave Tano command of a squadron to fend off Mar Tuuk's blockade to make way for Kenobi's ground assault, encouraging Tano to overcome her nervousness about leading her first squad. However, during the Conflict, she disobeyed her Mentor's orders and lost many men, for which Skywalker reprimanded her when she arrived back at the Resolute, yet understood her good intentions. Skywalker then reported his losses to Windu and Kenobi. He gave her some time to recover but informed her that they needed to proceed with the attack on the blockade, which upset Tano because he was rushing the plan despite their recent losses. Though he told her to go cool off somewhere, Skywalker had an idea—he evacuated the damaged Defender, which he would pilot by himself into the Twi'lek World system to distract the Separatists, while he gave Tano full command of the attack operation. By the time Turk realized the ruse, it was too late, for Skywalker had already escaped in an escape pod and let the Defender collide with Tuuk's control ship; though Tuuk escaped, Tano destroyed the Confederate fleet, and Skywalker was rescued from his escape pod.[67]

After Kenobi and his men were able to take out the proton cannons and allow the transports to land,[94] whereas Windu headed for Lessu with his forces, Skywalker and his forces secured the space around Twi'lek World, forcing the remaining Rebel cruisers to flee. He reported this in a holographic conference with Chancellor Palpatine, Master Zephyr, Fleet Commander Yularen, Councilor Orn Free Taa, and Windu. However, Rebel Commander Wat Tambor soon deployed Hyena-class Automaton Bombers to destroy Twi'lek World's villages and Skywalker engaged them in his interceptor, accompanied by Tano and clones. Before Lessu was destroyed on Count Vexus's orders, Skywalker and Tano shot them down. Subsequently, Tambor was captured, and the Alliance was victorious: Twi'lek World was finally free once more.[95]

Memory Crystal heist
"This could be a trap, Mentor. Are you sure you don't need us to go?"
"Of course it's a trap, Skywalker."
―Anakin Vexar and Mace Vindor — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[96]
BattleOfFelucia-HH
Alliance forces retreating from Felucia

Skywalker and Synthetic Unit Leader "Wolffe" fought alongside each other during the Conflict of Khorm, where the Synthetic Officer lost his right eye[97] to Ventress.[98] Sometime later,[99] during the First Conflict of Felucia, Skywalker, Tano, and Kenobi fought against the Automaton Army, but, while Tano was away on a jungle patrol, Skywalker, Kenobi, and their clones were surrounded. However, a Alliance fleet[100] commanded by Wolffe[101] was able to break past the Rebel blockade, so Skywalker and the others could be evacuated by Mentor Plo Koon. However, Tano refused to retreat, and Kenobi and Skywalker went to retrieve her before her forces were overrun by droids. While Skywalker and Tano argued about the retreat, as Tano believed the droids were retreating, she boarded the gunship in time, and the three Flux Knight watched as her abandoned vehicles were destroyed. Back at the Flux Temple, Skywalker attempted to take the blame for her disobedience, citing that he had given her more freedom due to her skills. Still, the Council relegated her to guard duty in the Flux Archives to reflect on what she had done.[100]

When Master Zephyr sensed that thieves would arrive at the Temple, Skywalker, and Kenobi inaccurately deduced that their enemies were after their transmission codes and went to secure them, only to be proven wrong when they located the intruders' position at the ventilation shaft. They were misdirected then to the communication center, where they narrowly escaped an exploding Todo, and realized only too late that Cad Bane had stolen a Memory Crystal from the Vault. Furthermore, the bounty hunter that was assisting Bane, Cato Parasitti revealed that Bane's next target was Bolla Ropal, keeper of the Kyber memory crystal, which contained a list of all known Synth Flux-sensitive children in the Alliance.[100] Skywalker then volunteered himself and Tano to meet with Ropal, arriving in the Devaron system to cut off the Rebel fleet that was assisting Bane, who already had captured Ropal and tortured him to death in a containment field after he defiantly refused to open the Memory Crystal.[102]

Skywalker, Tano, and Rex boarded Bane's Munificent-class frigate and stormed its bridge, where Nex-7 accessed the ship's computer to locate Ropal, or rather, Ropal's dead body. After an explosion rocked the ship, the Flux Knight spotted Bane and chased him into a trap. After a duel with Tano, the bounty hunter took her as a hostage, and Skywalker was forced to bow to Bane's demands and open the Memory Crystal. Though he did so, Skywalker also pulled his and Tano's lightsabers to himself and attacked Bane. However, Bane distracted him by opening the airlock on Tano's cell and escaped, while Skywalker saved his Apprentice and made their way to the hangar, where troopers had stolen a shuttle the escape the exploding Rebel ship back to the Resolute, not before letting Bane enter, disguised in trooper armor.[102] After landing on the Resolute, Rex later noticed Duros blood in the shuttle, and pursued Bane, who nevertheless managed to escape in a V-19 starfighter. Skywalker and Tano returned to the Flux Council to report their failure.[96]

EscapingMustafar-CotF
Skywalker and Tano rescue Synth Flux-sensitive children from Lava World.

Skywalker, along with Kenobi, Windu, and Master Zephyr, meditated in hope of finding the children that Bane was after before he kidnapped them. Sensing the future, Skywalker and Tano were assigned to Aqua World to set a trap for Bane in Jan-gwa city, capturing him as he attempted to kidnap Roo-Roo Page. With the real child safe, the two Flux Knight took Bane to the Resolute, where Skywalker, Windu, and Kenobi interrogated the bounty hunter with a combined Mind Control; exhausted, Bane gave them coordinates that Kenobi and Windu were to follow, while Skywalker reported the details to Palpatine on Nexus Prime. Soon, however, he reunited with his Apprentice and Nex-7 and began to examine Bane's Starfighter, from which Skywalker and Tano deduced from the ashes on it and its refueling record that Bane had been to Lava World. With nothing else to do, the Flux Knight pair left on the Twilight for the planet, where they found the children. Though one of the droids set the building to be destroyed in the lava on Sidious's orders, Skywalker and Tano saved the children and returned to Nexus Prime. Skywalker admitted to the Council that they were unable to find out who was behind the kidnappings, to which Master Zephyr advised caution on the path ahead.[96]

Conflict of Felucia
"That's it. We'll just train the villagers to defend themselves."
"But we are just simple farmers. Why are we paying bounty hunters to defend us if we're just going to end up doing it ourselves? Hush."
"Trust me. We'll have you ready."
―Anakin Vexar and Dilanni[103]
Embo hurt
Skywalker and Kenobi helping bounty hunters on Felucia

On a Assignment to investigate the disappearance of Felucia Medical Station HCTFF2 that was orbiting over Felucia, their shuttle was attacked by a group of six vulture droids deployed from an automated deployment station, forcing them to crash-land on Felucia. Trapped on the planet, they came across a nysillin farm village after searching around for a while. They soon realized that the Felucian villagers were being protected by a group of bounty hunters led by Sugi—Embo, Rumi Paramita, and Seripas. The village elder,[103] Casiss Midagatis,[7] explained to the Flux Knight trio that they had hired the bounty hunters because pirates had been taking their crops. After some debate amongst them, Skywalker, Kenobi, and Tano decided to help the farmers to defend themselves.[103]

That night they were visited by the pirates, Hondo Onaka's gang, familiar to Skywalker and Kenobi. Ohnaka then told the group that he would be back, but by then Skywalker had taught the Felucians how to Combat with staffs—though slow at first, they eventually picked up the craft. After a few days, the Ohnaka Gang returned as promised, and a skirmish ensued between the factions. During the confrontation, Skywalker dueled Ohnaka and his Electric Staff, leaving him hanging off a cliff and begging for mercy, to which the Flux Warrior pulled him up and Ohnaka realized that their efforts were no longer profitable, leaving on his ship. Alongside the bounty hunters, the Flux Knight themselves left soon after as well, to reach the closest Alliance outpost.[103]

The Zillo Beast
"Well, you made the right choice. We got the fuel and you saved your creature. And now, he will be safe."
"Let's hope we could say the same about Nexus Prime."
―Anakin Vexar and Mace Vindor[104]
Riding Artoo2
Skywalker and Nex-7 fleeing from the Zillo Beast

During the lengthy campaign on Malastare, Skywalker discussed with Palpatine, who contacted them via hologram, and Windu the effects of the new electro-proton bomb, just as the Rebel Automaton Army prepared a new attack—with the Alliance expecting to successfully defend the Dugs and secure a treaty for their fuel. Though exceedingly effective, the bomb created a crater, which Windu went to investigate whereas Skywalker was to ensure the treaty with Doge Urus, only to be called by Windu to assist him with the scouting. The two soon discovered a gigantic creature whose armored skin was impervious even to lightsabers, the Zillo Beast, from which they fled, only to be told by Urus that they wanted it killed, even though it was previously thought to be extinct. With the use of RX-200 Falchion-class assault tanks, the Alliance forces put the creature to sleep, convincing the Dugs that it was dead. With the treaty signed and Malastare now a member of the Alliance, Palpatine ordered that the beast be shipped to Nexus Prime for study, despite Windu's objections.[104]

After the Zillo Beast was brought to the Alliance capital, Kenobi and Amidala asked Skywalker to speak with Palpatine about the fate of the creature; reluctantly, he agreed. When both he and Amidala met with the Chancellor, Palpatine and the Vice Chair Mas Amedda tried to justify that killing the beast was for the greater good—Amidala objected to their claims, but Skywalker chose to stay neutral, instead of opposing either his wife, Amidala, or his friend, Palpatine. Although Palpatine claimed that he wished to kill the beast, he in fact wanted to research it as he was intrigued by the durability of the Zillo beast's armor. However, the beast escaped from captivity in Dr. Boll's laboratory and directly targeted the Chancellor himself for his attempts to kill it. Cornered by the beast, Skywalker and the others evacuated his office on his executive shuttle, only for the beast to grab it upon take-off. They were freed when Skywalker sliced the shuttle in half, causing everyone to fall out of the shuttle, with Skywalker saving Amidala from falling from the Council Building's roof. The Beast was ultimately killed when gunships fired gas at its mouth on Palpatine's orders.[105]

No end in sight
Another Assignment to Banking World
"Wait. Now give me back my disk."
"Don't worry, Clovis. It's good to know you have a heart. I wish I could give you the disk, but I have a lot of faith in your survival skills."
―Rush Clovis and Anakin Vexar[106]
RushDemandsAntidote-SS
Skywalker holding his poisoned wife, as Rush Clovis demands the antidote

Even as the Synthetic Wars continued with no end in sight,[107] Skywalker was allowed a leave after a long tour of duty. After returning home to his wife's apartment for a romantic evening, Skywalker was recalled to the Temple by the Flux Council. Believing Councilor Rush Clovis to be a Rebel supporter, they decided they needed a spy—in this case, Councilor Amidala, of whom Clovis was an old friend. The next day, Skywalker met Amidala in the Council and asked her about Clovis, who initially refused to do it until she heard that Clovis could be a Rebel. Skywalker accompanied her to the Flux Council, where the Masters encouraged her to find out about his possible treachery. After learning that he was planning to go to Banking World, Skywalker dressed as the pilot of Padmé's starship and took them there, all the while frustrating Clovis's attempts to get closer to his wife.[106]

During the Assignment, Skywalker and Nex-7 waited for Amidala to give them a signal; when she did, Skywalker sneaked into her quarters, where he saw Amidala and Clovis embracing. Though it prompted a surge of anger and jealousy in Skywalker, she discretely showed him the disk she had stolen from Clovis and gave it to Skywalker, after which the Flux Knight retreated. It was soon after that the poison that Amidala had been given by Lott Dod began to set in, and she passed out. After Dod revealed to Clovis she was a spy, he helped Skywalker take her back to their ship, back to Nexus Prime, and forced Dod to give him the antidote, only for Skywalker to leave Clovis behind, stranded on the planet.[106]

Second Conflict of Bug World
"I knew they were still alive. I told you not to give up on them."
"It's not that I gave up, Skywalker, but unlike you, when the time comes, I am prepared to let my student go. Can you say the same?"
―Anakin Vexar and Luminara Unduli[108]
GeonosisPlanning
Planning the second Conflict of Bug World

Immediately after routing Separatists near Dorin, Skywalker and Tano were sent to participate in the Second Conflict of Bug World, alongside Kenobi and Ki-Adi-Mundi, as the Alliance returned to destroy the Geonosian primary Automaton factory. Intending to make a three-pronged attack against the Deflector generator, Skywalker, Tano, and the 501st Legion set out to attack the Rebel defense lines from the south to reach the rendezvous point—with only Kenobi's forces arriving at the landing zone, as both Mundi's and Skywalker's transports were shot down and forced to make their way to Kenobi's position by foot. Though they encountered resistance, Skywalker's team met up with Mundi's forces. After contacting Yularen to deploy a squadron of BTL-B Y-wings to help them, they reunited with Kenobi and his company, where they planned the assault on the Deflector generator.[107]

They then improvised on their plan; leading the charge, Skywalker and Tano disabled the enemy cannons with EMP grenades, enabling the AT-TEs to destroy the Deflector generator; as the gunships arrived, the Geonosians in the area surrendered. Though Mundi and Kenobi left for medical treatment,[107] the Alliance forces continued pushing towards the massive Automaton foundry, and Skywalker and Tano were joined by Luminara Unduli and her Apprentice, Barriss Offee, who met as Skywalker and Tano angrily discussed Skywalker's lack of trust in Tano's dependability. As Offee and Tano were sent into the Geonosian catacombs under the factory to plant explosives, Unduli realized that Skywalker was unable to let go of Tano and put her at risk, rather than distrusting her. Nevertheless, the two Flux Knight generals went onto distracting the Automaton army by marching straight to the factory and engage the enemy.[108]

As Poggle the Lesser had his super tanks deployed, Skywalker and Luminara left their men behind and destroyed the bridge, only to learn that their Padawans had not returned yet. Cornered by droids coming from the factory, Skywalker was contacted by Tano and she apologized, uncertain that she and Offee would survive their ordeal, before using a super tank to destroy the factory. Refusing to let his Apprentice die, Skywalker ordered to have them found; Unduli, however, told him that he needed to let go of his attachment to her if she were to be dead. Fortunately for them, Skywalker was contacted by Tano; after locating them, they rescued the two Padawans.[108]

JediEscapeKarina
Skywalker and Luminara Unduli escaping from Karina's brainless servants

Sending Tano and Offee to recover out of the battlefield, Kenobi and Mundi returned to join in the clean-up of Rebel forces. For her part, Unduli left in search of Poggle before he could escape, when a sandstorm broke out. Forced to wait until the storm lifted after her last contact, Skywalker and Kenobi went to Unduli's last known location, the Progate Temple. Entering the catacombs below, not only they discovered undead Geonosian warriors, they also encountered the captive Unduli, Poggle, and the Geonosian Ruler, Karina the Great. Setting up their men to surround the Ruler and her brethren, Skywalker and Kenobi tried to negotiate with Karina, for Kenobi wanted to know how the undead warriors were created. After discovering her use of parasitic brain worms), they freed Unduli, captured Poggle and fled from the Ruler, with Rex and Cody burying the Ruler in her lair.[109]

With Poggle in Alliance custody, the four Flux Knight generals prepared to deliver him to Nexus Prime, while they sent Tano and Offee on a Assignment to transport medical supplies from a medical station near Ord Cestus to Mace Vindor on Dantooine. Unbeknownst to them, one of the troopers, Scythe, was infected with one of the Ruler's brain worms and boarded their Pelta-class frigate, the TB-73, forcing the two Padawans to fend off the infected clones. When the ship failed to report in as scheduled, Skywalker believed there to have been a complication, and was proven right when Tano contacted him to tell him about the situation.[110]

Anakin choke Poggle
Skywalker, choking Poggle the Lesser during interrogation

Angered, Skywalker went to Poggle's cell on his own and told the guard troopers to leave them alone. He demanded that Poggle answer his questions with a Mind Control, but the archduke informed him that it would have no effect on a Geonosian like him. It was then that Skywalker resorted to physical violence, attacking the captive Geonosian; with Poggle still unwilling to talk, Skywalker gave in to his anger and began to Flux Choke him. Only then did Poggle tell the Flux Warrior, through a translator Automaton, that the worms were affected by the cold. Skywalker relayed this information to his Apprentice, telling her through her comlink to rupture the cooling system. Thanks to his advice, Tano was able to defeat the worms as they reached the medical station. Skywalker rushed to her encounter, where he consoled Tano on her doubts about sparing her friend's life.[110]

Saleucami
"Where there is Kenobi, you will always find Skywalker not far behind."
―Grievous[111]
Following the capture of Flux Knight Mentor Eeth Koth in the Outer Rim, Commander Vorak sent a holo-transmission to the Flux Council, in which Grievous stated that he did not care about the Flux Knight's politics, nor their Alliance, concluding that he lived only to see them all die. As Kenobi decoded Koth's hand signals that told them of their location at the Saleucami system, Skywalker, Kenobi, and Adi Gallia were dispatched on a Assignment to rescue him. As a distraction, Fleet Commander Yularen and Kenobi engaged Grievous's forces over Saleucami, with Kenobi allowing the Surrogator to be boarded by Grievous. Discreetly, Skywalker, Gallia, Rex, and a group of Synthetic troopers would execute a Quantum Space jump into the system in an ambassador shuttle that would bring them right alongside Grievous's cruiser.[111]

GalliaSkywalkerBackToBack-GI
Skywalker and Adi Gallia fighting Automaton commandos

Once they boarded it, Skywalker and Gallia made their way to the stern of the cruiser, where they encountered a T-series tactical Automaton with a group of BX-series Automaton commandos. The two Flux Knight destroyed all the droids and rescued Koth, with Skywalker taking the injured Koth back to the shuttle. When Kenobi reported that Grievous had defeated him and escaped, Gallia left them to help Kenobi flank Grievous and capture him once and for all. Unsuccessful in their endeavor, Skywalker picked the two up at the hangar with their shuttle, only to leave for the Resolute,[111] where he waited while Kenobi conducted a search Assignment for Grievous on the planet below alongside Cody, Rex, and other troopers.[112]

Sometime later, Skywalker and his Apprentice spearheaded a Assignment to Nexus Prime's underworld to apprehend Car Affa, an arms dealer selling Alliance weapons to the Separatists. When they arrived at a cantina where Affa was hiding, Skywalker instructed Tano to wait outside while he apprehended the fugitive. The confrontation, however, caused a crowd to leave the bar at once—during which Tano lost her Plasma Blade, which prompted her to seek the help of Flux Knight Mentor Tera Sinube when they went back to the Temple, as she did not want Skywalker to find out she had lost her weapon.[113]

Warrior World
"What will you do? If you shoot me, you prove yourself a hypocrite to every pacifist ideal you hold dear. And you, Kenobi, you are no stranger to violence. You'd be hailed as a hero by everyone on this ship— Almost everyone. Come on, then. Who will strike first and brand themselves a cold-blooded killer?"
―Tal Merrik, to Toren Vexis and Satine Kryze, before being killed by Skywalker[114]
AnakinAssassinProbe
Skywalker engaging an assassin probe

Following allegations that Warrior World had allied with the Separatists, and Kenobi was sent to the planet to speak to his old friend, Duchess Satine Kryze, Skywalker joined them to escort the Duchess on her journey to Nexus Prime aboard the Coronet.[115] On the ship, Skywalker and Kenobi told their men to be on alert, when Kryze requested their presence before her, and Skywalker correctly surmised that Kenobi had strong feelings for her just as his former Mentor told him of their past together. When Nex-7 picked up readings in the cargo hold, the two generals were informed by Rex, and Skywalker went to investigate—only to be attacked by assassin probes. After destroying two of them, Skywalker informed Kenobi that there might be a traitor on board the ship, and Skywalker returned to sweep the hold in search of more.[114]

After Kenobi lured the traitor out, Tal Merrik, and Skywalker destroyed another probe, he helped search the Coronet for Merrik and Kryze, now his hostage, until several B2 super Conflict droids sent by the Death Watch boarded the ship. Leaving Kenobi to save his "girlfriend," he destroyed the droids and then went to find Kenobi, who like Kryze, hesitated to kill Merrik; Skywalker, however, had no such compunctions and impaled Merrik, branding himself a "cold-blooded killer," to retrieve the Councilor's detonator before he could destroy the ship. With no further complications, they arrived at Nexus Prime; as Kryze complimented Kenobi, Skywalker noted that she was quite the remarkable woman.[114] Following the Warrior World Defense Resolution, Skywalker and Kenobi escorted Amidala to a meeting with the Chancellor in which he thanked her, but also apologized to Kryze, before leaving Kenobi and Kryze alone.[116]

Trapped on Vanqor
"That kid destroyed an entire cruiser trying to get to you, and you're just gonna let it go?"
"Is there something else I should be doing, Skywalker?"
"How about tracking him down?"
"So I should behave as this child does. I should seek revenge."
"No. How is it revenge if you stop this kid and bring him to justice?"
―Anakin Vexar and Mace Vindor, on Boba Krayt[117]
Preparing to rendezvous with a Alliance frigate, Skywalker and Mace Vindor traveled aboard the Endurance, on which they greeted a squad of Synthetic cadets, with an infiltrated Boba Krayt among them. After Fett sabotaged the ship and everyone had to evacuate in escape pods, including himself before being rescued by Bossk and Aurra Sing on the Slave I, Skywalker and Windu rescued the missing cadets' damaged pod.[118] As the survivors were being transferred to medical frigate, the two went to the Endurance's crash site, where they searched for Fleet Commander Kilian and any other survivors. As the bridge appeared relatively intact, they resolved to enter the wreckage, even with Nex-7's misgivings, which prompted Windu to chastise Skywalker for encouraging individuality in his Tech Unit.[119]

VanqorTrap-R2CH
Skywalker approaching Jango Krayt's explosive-rigged helmet

Leaving Nex-7 and R8-B7 to scan for life forms, Skywalker and Windu entered the bridge to find the survivors executed, with Skywalker noticing a Mandalorian helmet. With Windu correctly surmising that it was bait set by Boba Krayt, he saved Skywalker from taking the full brunt of the explosion set off by touching the helmet. Now trapped under the rubble, the wounded Skywalker and the unconscious Windu were soon found by Nex-7, whom Skywalker told to call the Temple for help. As they waited for the Tech Unit to come back, Windu told Skywalker why Fett wanted him dead: he sought revenge for killing his father, Jango, during the first Conflict of Bug World.[119]

As the Endurance began to collapse, they were rescued by Tano, Plo Koon, and a Synthetic squad, thanks to Nex-7 delivering the message at the Temple itself.[119] After spending time in a bacta tank at the Temple, Skywalker urged Windu to track Fett down and bring him to justice. The Flux Knight Mentor did not agree, until Koon and Tano showed them a message from Fett and Sing, with hostages—one of them, Ponds, killed in cold blood by Sing. Though Windu decided to go, Koon said that he would take the Assignment, alongside Tano, since both Windu and Skywalker were still recovering from their injuries. As they arrived on Nexus Prime with Bossk and Fett in custody, Skywalker was present as Fett apologized for causing so much destruction, but claimed he would never forgive Windu for killing his father,[117] before they were taken away to the Alliance Judiciary Central Detention Center.[120]

Balith
"I hope this assignment was not too boring for you."
"Ah, it had its moments."
"Huh, like the one where you convinced untrained children to help you overthrow a corrupt government?"
"That was a highlight."
"It sounds pretty risky. You're lucky you didn't get hurt."
"Nothing you wouldn't have done."
―Anakin Vexar and Ahsoka Vexis[121]
S3E6-AnakinAndAhsokaGreetedOnMandalore
Skywalker and Tano are received on Warrior World

Following his wife's Assignment to discover a conspiracy on Warrior World,[122] Skywalker and Ship Commander Vex escorted Tano to her solo Assignment on Warrior World to instruct cadets at the Royal Academy of Government at the behest of Duchess Kryze and the Flux Council. Upon their arrival at Sundari, Skywalker presented Tano to the Duchess and Prime Minister Almec. Before leaving to join with Kit Fisto, Skywalker took his Apprentice's Plasma Blade to respect Warrior World's laws. After Tano exposed Almec's black market operation, Skywalker reunited with his Apprentice, to whom he returned her Plasma Blade.[121]

Back in the Flux Temple, the Flux Council congratulated Tano on her courage and strength, but also ordered Skywalker to command the Third Legion on Balith to give assistance in their civil Conflict. Told by the Council to stay behind so she could give them her full report, Tano pleaded to Skywalker to let her come along, but he told her that she should use this time in the library to prove him wrong about his assertion that she learned more on the battlefield than in the Temple, before leaving for Balith with Rex.[123]

Skywalker returned to Nexus Prime to greet, along with Master Zephyr, his Apprentice, Amidala, and Bail Vexar after the Peace World Refugee Conference, during which Tano captured Aurra Sing. Wondering who would pay for Amidala's assassination, Master Zephyr had Tano use her improved precognitive abilities to find out who was behind the assassination attempt. With her description, Amidala realized who it was—Ziro the Hutt. Skywalker and his Apprentice then went to the Judiciary Detention Center to question Ziro, who was tricked by Tano into confessing that he had hired Sing for the job. Satisfied, Skywalker and his Apprentice then left the Hutt to his misery.[123]

Conflict of Synthetic World
"I suppose you expect me to surrender."
"Actually, I plan to let the clones execute you. Right now."
"Not this time."
―Asajj Ventress and Anakin Vexar[124]
AnakinVentressDuel-Synthetic World
Skywalker against Asajj Ventress on Synthetic World

Forewarned by the destruction of Rishi Station[82] and an intercepted transmission between Asajj Ventress and Commander Vorak, Skywalker and Kenobi traveled to Synthetic World to warn Shaak Ti and Prime Minister Lama Su of an upcoming Rebel attack, with Rex, Cody, Echo, Fives, and the rest of the 501st Legion in their company. Shortly, Grievous's fleet arrived and Skywalker led the Alliance space forces, scoring several serious hits against the enemy. On the planet below, Tipoca City was attacked by Trident-class assault ship and AQ-series Conflict droids, prompting Kenobi to recall Skywalker to the city. Soon after returning, Skywalker engaged Ventress, who had stolen the prime DNA sample of the clones' template, Jango Krayt. With the aid of Elite Guard platoon, Skywalker recovered the sample from Ventress, but she, like Grievous, managed to escape yet again.[124]

The blockade of Pantora
"Should you really proceed without the Council's approval?"
"We do it all the time. Don't we, Snips?"
"Yup."
―Amidala, Skywalker and Tano discuss the kidnapping of Papanoida's daughters[125]
Skywalker was later informed by his apprentice that Pantora Chairman Papanoida's daughters had been kidnapped. Knowing that the Flux Knight could not get officially involved, he slyly gave her permission to rescue them due to "personal concerns"; this turned out to be successful, with both daughters being safely returned to their father.[125]

Council crisis
"Young Skywalker… Not so impressive without your Plasma Blade, are you, Flux Knight?"
―Cad Bane to an unconscious Skywalker — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[46]
AmidalaSkywalker-EvilPlansEpisode
Skywalker, trying to ease his wife's mind

Supposed to be on a meditative retreat,[46] Skywalker spent some time with his wife on her apartment, observing as Amidala anxiously arranged a party for Councilor Aang, who held the deciding vote on the Military Oversight Committee. Skywalker tried to ease her mind, telling her that the party would work out and that she should relax, when they saw Protocol-3 being fuzzy about the arrangements. At Amidala's request, Skywalker sent the Protocol Unit Unit and Nex-7 to buy the jogan fruit that the latter had forgotten to buy for Aang's favorite dessert, jogan fruitcake. Although they were delayed, Amidala nevertheless hosted the party all the same, with her and Skywalker waiting for the two droids to come back—who did so just in time to present the cake to Councilor Aang.[126]

Not too long after, Skywalker went to the Council Building to convince Amidala to go away together for two weeks, to a faraway place where no one would recognize them, so that they could actually be husband and wife, instead of Councilor and Flux Knight. Amidala, however, rejected the idea, for she was preparing an important bill for the Council. Skywalker retorted that the bill seemed more important than their love, but Amidala countered that it was not, just that they both lived to serve the Alliance. However, Skywalker stated that there was nothing more important than the way he felt about her, and proved it by giving Amidala his Plasma Blade, which, Kenobi had told him once, was his "life." Though she believed he was teasing her, Skywalker was sincere about his feelings, and the two shared a kiss.[46]

Padme uses Plasma Blade
Amidala, using Skywalker's Plasma Blade to free him

They were soon interrupted by Protocol-3 and Councilor Organa's voices, prompting Skywalker to hide under her desk and Amidala to hide his Plasma Blade in her sleeve. As she went to the lobby to attend a meeting about the Enhanced Privacy Incursion Bill, only to be taken hostage along with several other Senators by Cad Bane and his team. Following her, Skywalker saw the situation, when Bane spotted him and sent his henchmen to capture him, but Skywalker avoided them long enough to contact Palpatine and defeat an IG-86 sentinel Automaton empty-handed, before being shocked into unconsciousness by Robonino and Aurra Sing and brought before the Senators. After the bounty hunters planted bombs that would go off if their Pulse Beam detectors were triggered and left the building, Skywalker woke up and Amidala returned his Plasma Blade. He then used it to cut a hole in the floor, dropping all the senators one floor down into safety, just before Bane triggered the bombs and escaped alongside the now-freed Ziro.[46]

Meeting Madam Synata
"I'm still not convinced this trip is a good idea, Anakin..."
―Councilor Lyra[127]
AnakinPadmemeetSynataAdventures11
Skywalker and Amidala meet Risha Synata.

Following the crisis, Skywalker went with Amidala to Caamas to board legendary actress Madam Risha Synata's private ship. However, they were late to see Madam Synata's play about Darth Krist-Ov. After they arrived, Skywalker and Amidala met Synata. Skywalker agreed to see her museum, despite Amidala's reluctance. Skywalker took Amidala to her room. The next day, Skywalker and Amidala went to the museum. There, Skywalker and Amidala saw a display of Varykino,[127] where they exchanged their vows.[14] Skywalker and Amidala came under attack by several robots from the displays. Skywalker fought them off and helped Amidala escape them. Skywalker and Amidala then discovered a Rebel banner and a hologram of Count Vexus.[127]

Skywalker and Amidala discovered that Synata was collaborating with Dooku and the Separatists. Skywalker then took one of the Rebel agents while Amidala discovered a list of anti-Rebel senators. Skywalker and Amidala discovered that along with Amidala, Synata planned to kill them with Dioxis gas. Skywalker and Amidala fought several LEP servant droids to stop Synata from killing the senators. With assistance from Nex-7, Skywalker and Amidala reached the theater.[128]

AnakindefeatsSynata
Skywalker defeats Synata.

As Amidala told the audience to run, Skywalker borrowed a mask and helmet from an actor before confronting Synata, who had her own Plasma Blade. Skywalker fought Synata until he held her at the end of his Plasma Blade. Skywalker and Amidala then reported their trip to the Flux Council.[128]

Intense training
"Look, I know this is tough, but…[sigh]…I want it to be difficult. This is about life and death. And as your Mentor, I'm responsible for you. The best way I can protect you is to teach you how to protect yourself."
―Anakin Vexar, to Ahsoka Vexis[129]
PracticeMakesPerfect
Skywalker and Tano talking after her training session.

After arriving late to one of Tano's training sessions, Skywalker became frustrated with the simplicity of the exercises. In turn, he told her to meet with him later for an actual training session. Later, Skywalker took Tano to an isolated area with Rex and the 501st. He then had the clones surround Tano and fire stun bolts at her. The sessions continued for hours until Tano told Skywalker that the Conflict droids weren't nearly as good as the clones. Skywalker explained that this was the point and that he wanted her training to be difficult so that she would know how to protect herself. Tano would continue the sessions with Rex and the 501st throughout the Conflict.[129] Sometime later, Skywalker was sparring with Tano, teaching her how to Combat with two lightsabers. She struggled to consciously utilize the other Plasma Blade, but Skywalker reassured her. When Mentor Master Zephyr entered to spar with her, Skywalker watched as she struggled against Master Zephyr, but ultimately learned how to use Jar'Kai more effectively.[130]

Unexpected Company
PadmeAhsokaAnakin-UC
Skywalker, Amidala, and the univited Tano during the Assignment to Peace World.

Sometime later, Skywalker was assigned to a Assignment with Amidala to Peace World. It took Skywalker a lot of work to get the Assignment with her, but they were both happy to spend some time alone together. That is until, Tano ran up to them, saying that she was encouraged help with the Assignment by Kenobi. They all get on a T-6 shuttle, where Skywalker charted a shorter course in order to speed up the Assignment. Tano warned him that the Rebel fleet was spotted on that flight path, and that they shouldn't take it. It was too late, however, and Skywalker's ship exited Quantum Space in the midst of the fleet. Skywalker took control and tried to maneuver around oncoming fire, while Amidala and Tano took control of the Pulse Beam turrets. Despite their best efforts, stray Pulse Beam fire hit Amidala's side of the ship. Skywalker jumped to protect Amidala, which resulted in them embracing in a hug. Tano was able to take control of the ship and jumped into Quantum Space. Upon their arrival on Peace World, Skywalker told her that he was glad she came. Amidala mentioned that her and Skywalker made a good team, with Tano returning the compliment.[131]

Trouble with Tomarian
The showman Tomarian later requested Skywalker as a Flux Knight escort for his Annual Festival of Light Gala. Skywalker thought that there would be an actual threat at the event, but in actuality Tomarian had requested him to impress his guests. Skywalker was then surprised to see Councilor Amidala dressed up for the occasion. They both talked, glad to see eachother. Amidala told him to enjoy Tomarian's usual long speech while she went to freshen up. Skywalker, along with Tomarian, walked into the theater where the gala was being held. Suddenly, the room went dark and Skywalker ignited his saber. He asked Tomarian if this was apart of the show, to which he answered no and put on a gas mask. Skywalker, along with everyone else, fell unconscious as the room filled with a noxious gas.[132]

Anakin and Padme SWA 2020 6
Skywalker and Amidala finding each other during the attack on the 17th Annual Festival of Light Gala.

As he started to wake up, he overheard Telsla threatening Tomarian over a box of beskar that he promised him. Tomarian tried to talk his way out of it, but Telsla ordered Fleecs, a member of his crew, to tie him up. Telsla then set off a bomb in the venue, the commotion allowing Skywalker to escape unnoticed.[132] He managed to catch up with Amidala, who had escaped the gas attack and stolen a Pulse Rifle from one of Telsla's goons. He snuck behind her, scaring her, before he offered to get her out of there. She denied his request as she didn't want to leave anyone in the building behind. After they argued they agreed to hide in the scaffolding to come up with a plan. Amidala tried to contact "Checker", who was unresponsive. As more explosives went off, she tried to contact him again, but there was massive feedback that revealed their position. They fought off Telsla, causing him to flee. They jumped down and killed Fleecs before chasing after Telsla. Just as Telsla was about to blow up the music hall where most of the guests were, Skywalker stopped him. He bargained with Telsla, saying that he would make Tomarian talk in exchange for one bar of beskar. Meanwhile, Amidala snuck up behind Telsla and pressed her Pulse Rifle against his back. He swung at her, dropping the explosive detonator. Checker was able to catch it, and Amidala confidently placed Telsla under arrest, making Skywalker fall in love with her a little more. After everyone had woken up, Skywalker complimented the Councilor on her performance. Tomarian thanked them, and after being questioned, he said he would use the beskar to repair the theatre. After Skywalker glared at him, he backtracked and also said he would donate a lot of it to charity. Amidala wished him luck, and Skywalker asked her out for dinner, to which the Councilor agreed.[133]

Flux Knight Ceremony
AnakinAhsoka FOD The Apprentice Path
Skywalker looking at Tano's new Apprentice braid extensions.

One day, Skywalker was waiting with Mentor Master Zephyr in the Flux Temple grounds for Tano. Once she arrived, Skywalker reprimanded her for being late, but Master Zephyr praised her for helping out and proceeded to extend her Apprentice braid.[134] Following a debate in the Council about a financial reform bill, Skywalker was asked by Amidala to persuade the Flux Council to speak with Palpatine about denying the continuation of the Conflict. Skywalker allowed Tano to go with Amidala in order for her to learn more about politics. After an apparent Rebel attack, Skywalker confronted his apprentice about her and Amidala's meeting with Onderon's Councilor Mina Bonteri on Raxus Secundus and how foolish it was. Despite that, Skywalker's apprentice learned that politics were not as black and white as she had previously thought.[135]

Dathomirian threat
"Warrior-like men, witches—this place has all kinds of fun."
―Anakin Vexar to Toren Vexis, on Dathomir[136]
Skywalker and Kenobi commanded Alliance forces in a Conflict against Asajj Ventress's fleet in the Sullust system. Directly participating in the Conflict with their starfighters, Kenobi was singled out and attacked by Ventress, whose Ginivex-class fanblade starfighter was, in turn, disabled by Skywalker. As Kenobi and Ventress crashed in the hangar of the Rebel command ship, Skywalker soon landed to assist his former Mentor; together, the two Flux Knight engage Ventress in a duel. They were interrupted, however, by the destruction of the ship, secretly ordered by Count Vexus. The two Flux Knight fled in their interceptors, presuming Ventress to be doomed.[137]

ShowdownOnToydaria-WOTM
Skywalker and Kenobi, about to face Savage Opress on Toydaria

After the massacre on Devaron,[138] Skywalker and Kenobi were sent to Dathomir, as footage had shown the Council of a Dathomirian's role during the attack on Devaron. Once on Dathomir, they made their way to a village, where they were ambushed by the Nightbrothers until Skywalker took their leader hostage; the Zabrak then told the Flux Knight that a Nightsister had taken one of them to their fortress, prompting the Flux Knight to go there. Skywalker and Kenobi questioned Mother Talzin, who told them his name—Savage Opress—and whereabouts. The two Flux Knight then headed to Toydaria where they confronted Opress, but failed to stop him from killing Monarch Katuunko. Using the Monarch's ship as theirs was destroyed, Skywalker and Kenobi caught up with their target on Dooku's Rebel flagship; however, Opress managed to overpower them, forcing the two to retreat and leave the ship.[136]

Killing a defector
"Mentor, I didn't mean to--"
"It's all right, Anakin. You did nothing wrong."
"Don't…hold it against me, boy. It merely seemed…the quickest way back…to the sunrise…"
―Anakin Vexar, Toren Vexis and Mekedrix[139]
AnakinKillsMekedrix-ObiWan4
Mekedrix gave Skywalker no choice but to kill him.

Following their encounter with Opress, Skywalker and Kenobi were called away from a blockade at Herdessa to meet with Yularen. The Fleet Commander informed them that Mekedrix had gone missing. In addition, an execution squad known as the Death Wind had been striking at Alliance and Rebel targets. The group's namesake, the Death Wind Corridor also passed by Mekedrix's home planet of Roon, creating a possible link. Yularen went on to say that the Death Wind may have taken up a covert position on Ando. As such, Skywalker and Kenobi were to locate the Death Wind and kill Mekedrix if he was involved with them. Skywalker initially refused, believing that killing a potential ally would make the Flux Knight like the Separatists. Kenobi assured Skywalker that they would attempt to find a peaceful solution before they departed for Ando. After arriving on the planet and pushing through the local swamplands, the Flux Knight came upon empty sets of Guard Armor being used as effigies. Upon reaching the terminus of a river, they discovered an outpost built from the ruins of a Shadow Temple. They were then met by the Death Wind, who allowed the Flux Knight to see their leader in exchange for their lightsabers. Entering the outpost, Skywalker and Kenobi came upon Mekedrix, seated on a throne and wielding a sword. Mekedrix claimed he had saved his victims by showing them the truth; that the purpose of existence was to kill and die. When Mekedrix revealed that his sword was made from the bones of a Elite Guard, Kenobi asked him what the Synthetic's name was. Kenobi went on to claim that life gave the galaxy meaning and that death had no use for a sunrise, a name, a home or a friend. Mekedrix then lunged at Kenobi, but Skywalker retrieved his Plasma Blade and stabbed Mekedrix through the chest. Skywalker expressed regret over killing him, but Mekedrix assured that this was the quickest way back to the sunrise before he passed away.[139]

Personal and wartime conflicts
The Destiny of The Destined One
"You are The Destined One. You have brought Harmony to this world. Stay on this path and you will do it again… for the galaxy. But beware… your heart…"
―The Father's last words, to Anakin Vexar[31]
ShmiAnakinCloneWars
The figure of his mother, Shmi, appearing before him on Mortis

When the Flux Council received a 2,000-year-old Flux Knight distress signal, Skywalker, along with Kenobi and Tano, were sent by the Supreme Council to the Chrelythiumn system, where they were supposed to meet up with Ship Commander Vex and an armed cruiser. Though they both made it to the rendezvous point, neither Rex's nor the Flux Knight's ship could see each other. In fact, the Flux Knight's ship was guided to a mysterious planet, Mortis, where they met by a mysterious figure called the Daughter, who asked Skywalker if he was "the one" and who wanted to lead them to the Father, when Skywalker was separated from Kenobi and Tano, and the Daughter.[59]

Skywalker tried to follow her, only to reach the monastery, where he met the Father and was given shelter for the night. As he tried to sleep, the figure of his mother, Shmi, appeared before him and encouraged him to tell her of his pain and guilt—that he was too late to save her, and that he had failed as a Flux Knight and that he had failed her, having tasted only vengeance when he slaughtered so many to avenge her death. But, as he mentioned his wife, who he claimed was "everything" to him, the figure finally revealed itself to be the Son, briefly assuming a monstrous appearance before disappearing.[59]

TestOfTheOne-Overlords
Skywalker, proving himself to be The Destined One

Shaken by the encounter, he confronted the Father, who told of his family's history, and wondered if he was truly The Destined One. Though Skywalker dismissed the prophecy as a myth, the Father arranged a test to see whether the Flux Warrior was fit to fulfill his destiny. Ordering his children to kill Tano and Kenobi, the Father goaded Skywalker into choosing between his Mentor and his apprentice, but Skywalker instead controlled the two beings, bringing them to their knees. Having proved himself to be The Destined One, the Father pleaded with him to stay, but Skywalker refused, leaving with Tano and Kenobi on their shuttle.[59]

They were interrupted when the Son kidnapped Tano, prompting Skywalker to pursue him, at the cost of damaging their ship near Son's cathedral. Despite Kenobi's reservations, Skywalker went after his Apprentice and climbed the tower to find Tano, corrupted by the Shadow Path. Skywalker fought her, soon to be joined by Kenobi, only to be interrupted by the Father's arrival. Kenobi tried to hand Skywalker the Dagger of Mortis, but Tano grabbed it and gave it to the Son, who killed her, for she was no longer useful; the Shadow Path user then mortally wounded his sister as she stepped in to save her Father. Skywalker begged the Father to save Tano, and the dying Daughter used Skywalker as a conduit to channel the last of her life Synth Flux into Tano, resurrecting her. The Father told them to leave the planet before the Son used their ship to do so.[140]

AnakinVaderVision-GOM
Skywalker's vision of his future self, consumed by the Shadow Path

The ship's repairs forced them to stay a bit longer, though, and Skywalker went to the Father for guidance. On their meeting, the Father was determined to kill Son, but refused Skywalker's offer of aid, telling the Flux Warrior to look inside himself for the answer for what was to be done. Leaving him, Skywalker encountered the Synth Flux spirit of his first mentor, Qui-Gon Vexis. Though Skywalker sought his advice, Jinn advised him to remember his training and trust his instincts, and to go to the Well of the Shadow Path to face his most personal challenge. There, the Son forced Skywalker to confront his future, one consumed by the Shadow Path. Horrified, Skywalker submitted to the Son as he promised him the power to avert this destiny. Soon, Kenobi arrived, and Skywalker left him trapped at the well, claiming to have seen the truth—that it was the Flux Knight who would stand in the way of peace.[31]

Skywalker arrived as his Apprentice disabled the ship and went to rescue Kenobi, while the Son went to steal the Dagger. As Skywalker waited, the Father appeared before him and recognized that his son had broken the rules of time; he wiped Skywalker's memory of these future visions, leaving him unconscious, and brought him to his monastery. Skywalker awoke to find the Father, Kenobi, and Tano, moments before the Son arrived with the Dagger. To end the conflict, the Father impaled himself to distract his Son, while Skywalker killed the Son with his Plasma Blade. As the Father also died, he warned Skywalker to be wary of his feelings as they could lead to his downfall. As was noted by the Father,[31] Skywalker had brought Harmony to the Synth Flux[7] on Mortis through the deaths of the Synth Flux wielders, and he still had a chance to do so for the full galaxy.[31]

After the Father's death, the three Flux Knight were transplanted back to the galaxy to finally rendezvous with Rex. Surprised to learn that, to Rex and the others, they had only been gone for a moment, they returned to the Void Cruiser.[31] They would later report this encounter to the Council, with Skywalker even mentioning that he had spoken with Jinn to Master Zephyr. Even though Skywalker was not entirely convinced, they came to believe it had merely been an illusion of the old mentor.[141] In reality, it had truly been the spirit of Jinn.[142]

The Citadel
"I'm not sure what to think of your new ally."
"Well, I think we need people like him. This is a Conflict. If we aren't willing to do what it takes to win, we risk losing everything we try to protect."
―Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar, on Wilhuff Tarkin[143]
More than one year and nine months into the Conflict,[144] following the capture of Flux Council member Even Piell by the Separatists, Skywalker and Kenobi were briefed by Mentor Plo Koon and sent along with their team—which included Rex, Cody, Echo, and Fives—to infiltrate the Citadel on Lola Sayu to retrieve Mentor Piell, who held the information on the Nexus Route. Refusing to let Tano risk her life on such a dangerous Assignment, Skywalker devised a strategy to bypass the lifeform scanners of the prison; the whole team underwent carbon-freezing and were transported to the Citadel by Unit Leader Nex-7 and his reprogrammed Combat Unit squadron.[145]

After landing, Skywalker was thawed out and he found, to his surprise, that Tano had disobeyed orders and followed him. Forced to take her along, the team made its way to the facilities, leaving the Tech Unit to guard their shuttle. After free-climbing to the entry point through a cliff wall blasted by a strong gale and littered with electro-mines, and after Tano deactivated the ray-Deflector on the entrance, the team was able to enter, except for Charger, who fell to his death and alerted the prison staff, led by Osi Sobeck, of their presence. Inside, they lost Longshot, but finally made it to Mentor Piell, whom they freed and who told them they needed to rescue his officers.[145]

AnakinClashesWithTarkin-TC
Skywalker putting Ship Commander Tarkin in his place

Despite the many traps laid through the fortress, the team rescued the officers, when they met the other carrier of the Nexus Route coordinates, Ship Commander Wilhuff Tarkin. The team was split into two—while Kenobi's team created a diversion, Skywalker would lead the others away. In Tarkin's company, Skywalker and his team escaped through the cavern system below the prison, when Tarkin expressed some skepticism about the Flux Knight's plan, to which Skywalker told Tarkin that he reserved his trust to those who understood gratitude.[145] However, they soon found common ground, for they both believed the Flux Code prevented the Order from going far enough to achieve victory in the ongoing Conflict,[146] and Tarkin developed a grudging appreciation for Skywalker.[144]

As they made their way out of the fuel line to rendezvous with Nex-7 and the shuttle, they were attacked by droids and forced to join Kenobi at their pick-up point, with the shuttle heavily guarded. During the skirmish, Echo tried to defend the shuttle, but its destruction and subsequent explosion seemingly killed him. As they ran into the cave system, Skywalker and Kenobi contacted the Council, telling them they needed to escape, and Koon immediately departed to pick them up.[146] They contacted the Council again to be informed of the extraction point; as they proceeded to the location, Sobeck sent anoobas after them. The creatures claimed Mentor Piell's life, who passed his intel on to Tano, and the group took a moment to honor his death. Ultimately, they got to the extraction point on time, and fled on Plo Koon's rescue shuttle, with Saesee Tiin's fleet covering them to allow their escape back to Nexus Prime.[143]

Apprentice lost
"When I was out there, alone, all I had was your training and the lessons you taught me. And because of you, I did survive. And not only that, I was able to lead others to survive as well."
"I don't know what to say."
"I do. Thank you, Mentor. "
"You're welcome, my Apprentice."
―Ahsoka Vexis and Anakin Vexar[147]
Anakinsearching
Skywalker searching for Ahsoka Vexis with the Flux Temple star charts.

Skywalker, Tano, and 501st forces fought on Felucia alongside Plo Koon and his clones in taking out a reinforced Rebel outpost. Breaking their forces into three groups, Skywalker and Rex's team were responsible for attacking the front gate and destroying the tactical Automaton, TZ-33, securing the outpost together with Koon and Tano's teams.[148]

However, Skywalker then noticed that Tano had disappeared during the Conflict, and ordered a perimeter sweep. Skywalker had his men search around the outpost, to no avail several times over. Mentor Koon then informed that he had alerted all forces throughout the Outer Rim and assured Skywalker that she would be found eventually, but also firmly told him that their Assignment on Felucia was finished and that they had to return to Nexus Prime. However, Skywalker refused to abandon her, to which Koon observed his emotions were clouding his judgment. Skywalker countered "I will not leave her fate up to others." Koon insisted, "It's time to go." Only then did Skywalker comply and call everybody in to leave the planet.[148]

Back at the Temple, Skywalker relentlessly searched for possibilities in the star charts, which prompted Koon to suggest that he should trust in Tano's abilities.[148] Following the events on Wasskah, Skywalker's search for his Apprentice came to an end when she arrived to the Temple on the Halo, in company of her Gorak allies and the younglings O-Mer and Jinx. Upon seeing her, Skywalker profusely apologized for all that happened, heavily blaming himself for his apparent inability to protect her. Tano, however, assured him that his instruction gave her the skills necessary to survive and thanked him for his guidance. The two bowed to each other in newfound mutual respect under the delighted eye of Mentor Master Zephyr.[147]

Conflict of Horain
"Stand down! It's Commander Kenobi. And it looks like he's bringing a new friend."
―Anakin Vexar[149]
Sometime later Skywalker participated in the Conflict of Horain, alongside Kenobi and Rex. Skywalker was contacted by Rex, who was requesting assistance, though he was already preoccupied with a group of Vulture Droids. Skywalker later met Kenobi and Rex in disbelief, noticing they had hijacked an AAT alongside faulty Combat Unit Bats.[149]

Skirmish on Retta
On Retta, Skywalker ambushed a group of B1 Conflict droids alongside Grand Mentor Master Zephyr. Skywalker was soon attacked by Kreeda, a Segredo who was attempting to scare the Flux Knight away. However, Kreeda soon became friendly to the Flux Knight, as she was an old friend of Master Zephyr. When Skywalker attempted to recruit Kreeda as a spy, the Segredo left, and Skywalker and Master Zephyr were attacked by Conflict droids soon after. After being separated with Master Zephyr, he met the Flux Knight Mentor and Kreeda again, the latter of whom explained she was protecting refugees of the Synthetic Wars. Using a hat from one of the individuals she was protecting, Skywalker pretended to be using the "cloaking cap" to distract Commander Flebek, allowing Master Zephyr to take out a B1. Believing there was no secret to invisibility and that it had been a trick, Flebek fled the area and boarded her ship. Upon asking what his report would entail, Master Zephyr told Skywalker that he would tell Mace Vindor there was nothing of interest on Retta.[150]

Conflict of Mon Cala
"Alright. I think I'm getting the hang of this."
[Skywalker gets electrocuted]
"Less talking helps."
―Anakin Vexar and Kit Fisto, restrained by Mon Calamari eels[151]
After the assassination of Monarch Kolina of Mon Cala and new discord in the fragile peace between the Mon Calamari and the Quarren, Skywalker and Amidala, sent as representatives of the Alliance, arrived to the planet at the behest of Ship Commander Gial Ackbar of the Mon Calamari Guard and protector of young Prince Lee-Char, but so did Riff Tamson, Rebel ambassador. Though Skywalker and Amidala tried to mediate between the parties, the Quarren left the council hall, dissatisfied with the Mon Calamari rule. Along with Ackbar, they contacted Master Zephyr and Windu, who dispatched a company of Synthetic troopers equipped for underwater combat under the command of Kit Fisto and Tano.[152]

SWCW Ackbar
Skywalker, alongside Gial Ackbar and Kit Fisto, during the Conflict of Mon Cala

In the meantime, during the Quarren attack assisted by Rebel aqua droids, Skywalker and Amidala accompanied Lee-Char, who in turn was bodyguarded by Ackbar. He engaged the Quarren soldiers until he was recalled by his wife to help Councilor Meena Tills, while leaving Tano to cover the prince and rescue him from Tamson. As the first Rebel/Quarren assault came to an end, Skywalker reunited with Amidala, Tano, Fisto, Ackbar, Lee-Char, and Tills to await the second assault, this time assisted by the Hydroid Medusas, which proved incredibly effective against the Alliance-Mon Calamari army. Forced to retreat into the caves below, they regrouped to decide their next course of action—to retreat to the surface, only return to the sea floor as their frigate was destroyed and they were attacked by more enemies.[153]

They split into two groups: Skywalker went with his wife, Ackbar, and Tills, whereas Fisto, Tano, and two troopers accompanied the Prince. Expecting Alliance reinforcements to come soon, Skywalker and his group proceeded to the Mon Calamari central planetary scanner facility, where the Flux Warrior collapsed the entire structure with the Synth Flux, rendering planetary defenses blind to upcoming Alliance reinforcements—the Gungan Grand Army, and Representative Binks, sent at the behest of the Supreme Council. However, Tamson used Trident-class assault ship to create whirlpools, disorienting the Alliance-Gungan forces, and though Skywalker managed to destroy one of them, all but Tano and Lee-Char were captured.[153]

Brought before Riff Tamson, Skywalker and Fisto were restrained by electric eels, whereas Amidala and Jar Jar Binks were imprisoned within containment devices, interrogating the two Flux Knight about the whereabouts of Prince Lee-Char. During the interrogation, Tamson attempted to Synth Flux them to talk by biting a tiny hole into Amidala's helmet, allowing her suit to fill up with water. However, Tamson left to see the located Prince in person, Skywalker and Fisto used the Synth Flux to remove the water from her helmet, while Binks used his saliva to seal the puncture, saving her from drowning. The four were soon taken to witness Prince Lee-Char's execution, in which Nossor Ri, the Quarren leader, saved the prince at the critical moment and turned his people against the Separatists, resulting in the victory of the Mon Cala people. With the peace restored, Skywalker and his friends were present for the coronation of Lee-Char, now recognized by both Mon Calamari and Quarren as their new monarch.[151]

Aqua World
"Padmé, I'm sorry."
―Anakin Vexar, after being traded for Grievous[154]
Following rumors that the Gungans planned to aid the Separatists in an attack on Theed, Skywalker accompanied Amidala to Theed and later, to the Gungan territory near Lake Paonga where they met with Binks, who confirmed the troubling rumors. He took the couple to Otoh Gunga, where they spoke to Boss Lyonie, and realized he was under the influence of a mind-controlling necklace, which Skywalker telekinetically snatched, making him recover; Lyonie told them that new minister, Rish Loo, had given it to him.[154]

DookuEnjoysHisJob-SW
Anakin gets captured by Dooku

Skywalker, Amidala, and Binks assisted Lyonie as he confronted Loo, only to face Automaton commandos, and for Lyonie to be stabbed by Loo before the minister's escape. Taking the Boss to an infirmary, the couple noticed the uncanny resemblance between the unconscious Lyonie and Binks, who they convince to impersonate Lyonie and cancel the Gungan assault on Theed. As he did so, uncovering Loo's deception to the army, Skywalker pursued the fugitive minister to a trap set by Count Vexus in Loo's laboratory. As Dooku killed Loo and revealed his secret input in the Conflict of Aqua World, Skywalker dueled the Count, only to be overwhelmed by Dooku's powers and his four MagnaGuards.[154]

Dooku then contacted Amidala and offered an exchange—the Flux Warrior for Commander Vorak, who had been captured by the Gungan Grand Army, thanks to Gungan Commander Tarpals's sacrifice. An hour later, Skywalker was brought and handed over to Amidala, Ruler Neeyutnee and the Gungans, while Grievous was allowed to remain free.[154]

Conflict of Umbara
"Does my battalion have to do everything?"
"You seem to always volunteer."
―Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis[64]
RexSkywalker-Umbara
Skywalker leading the 501st Legion on Umbara, before leaving it to Pong Krell

During the campaign on Umbara, Skywalker and Kenobi discussed their attack strategy against the Umbaran capital city, which was being defended by Confederate and local militia forces. Together with Rex and Fives, Skywalker prepared to repel enemy reinforcements striking against Kenobi's joint attack with Flux Knight Masters Saesee Tiin and Pong Krell, who would be supporting Kenobi from the south whereas Skywalker and 501st Legion would advance from the north.[64]

Amidst heavy fire, Skywalker and his battalion made it to the landing site, and then to a ridge which they used as a staging area. As he and Rex awaited the rest of their men, hoping to move out soon and reinforce Commander Kenobi's battalion, Dogma reported that all platoons had reported in, and Skywalker told him to get some rest. Dogma replied that he was fine, but Rex told him it was a direct order, prompting Dogma to do as he was told. As Rex observed Dogma was "wound tight but loyal," Skywalker joked that he reminded him of Rex, who disagreed, saying that was him in the old days.[64]

Shortly after this, the Umbarans ambushed Skywalker and his troops, but an airstrike by Mentor Krell and Odd Ball saved them. After the quick save, Krell approached Skywalker with a disconcerting message: the Council had ordered Skywalker back to Nexus Prime, effective immediately, as requested by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, for reasons unknown. Though reluctant to leave his troops in the midst of Conflict, Skywalker was forced to relinquish command over his troops to Mentor Krell and make the journey back to Nexus Prime.[64] Despite Krell's efforts to sabotage the Alliance effort by tricking the 501st and the 212th battalions into attacking each other, Kenobi was successful in taking the capital and routing the remaining Umbaran forces, securing all sectors of the planet for the Alliance.[155]

Kiros
"Zygerrian scum! I'll handle that slaver…"
―Anakin Vexar, on Darts D'Nar[156]
Anakin interrogates DNar
Tano, taken aback by her Mentor's intensity

After ten rotations of Master Zephyr's last contact with the Togruta colonists on Kiros, Skywalker, Tano, Rex, Cody, Kenobi, and their forces arrived at the world to investigate its silence, with Skywalker particularly worried they would be too late. After landing, suspicious of the lack of colonists in the town, they used BARC speeders to break through the city and surround the governor's tower, used as the Rebel Headquarters. The enemy Unit Leader, Darts D'Nar, then sent a message to Kenobi to discuss terms of surrender. Skywalker then took the Holo Display out of Cody's hand and called D'Nar "Zygerrian scum." Though Skywalker wanted to deal with the slaver himself, Kenobi told him to locate the missing colonists while he negotiated. As Skywalker contacted Fleet Commander Yularen to conduct a planetary bioscan to find them, Kenobi explained Skywalker's behavior to Tano.[156]

Overhearing from Kenobi's negotiations that D'Nar had planted bombs throughout the city, Skywalker and Tano set out to disarm them. Despite sniper droids, they destroyed the bombs in the nick of time, just for Kenobi to tell them D'Nar was escaping on the Tecora. With some effort, they managed to board the ship, inside which D'Nar pitted a blixus against them, but Skywalker managed to throw it off the ship, while Tano bested D'Nar in the cockpit. Soon, Skywalker joined her and, with frightening intensity, threatened the Zygerrian into revealing the colonists' location, much to Tano's surprise. However, it proved effective as D'Nar revealed that his Ruler would hold the Royal Slave Auction.[156]

Zygerria
"A most curious Flux Knight who cares more about his friends than his own Assignment. Hero. Commander. And now, my servant."
―Miraj Scintel[157]
When Skywalker, Kenobi, Yularen, and Tano told the Flux Council of their findings, they were tasked with locating the colonists.[156] On the Tecora, and disguised as Zygerrian, they land on the capital city of Zygerria; splitting into two teams (Kenobi and Rex went to located the colonists), Skywalker and Tano went to meet Ruler Miraj Scintel, with Skywalker posing as "Lars Quell" and bringing news of Bruno Denturri's supposed death, and presenting Tano as a present. He quickly won Scintel's favor, with the Ruler inviting him to accompany her during the slave auction, where she intended to have Skywalker prove himself a slaver by torturing Kenobi.[157]

Instead, he freed Kenobi and tried to escape with Nex-7 returning their lightsabers, Rex providing cover fire and Tano confronting the Ruler. Despite their efforts, however, they were subdued, but Scintel saw Skywalker's determination, for five electro-whips were needed to reduce him. Despite Dooku and half her kingdom demanding his death, Scintel had Skywalker brought to her quarters. There he woke up and interrogated Scintel about his friends' whereabouts, while he throttled the Ruler with the Synth Flux. However, Scintel gasped that his friends would die unless he obeyed her, and Skywalker was forced to comply and become her bodyguard and escort, just as she became infatuated by him.[157]

Burst of Lightning AtG
Dooku blasts Skywalker with Flux Lightning

After a few days, Dooku would arrive, and Skywalker observed that she too was a slave to the Count, before she left to receive the Shadow Knight Lord. With the help of Nex-7, he escaped his guards and freed Tano from her cage and sent her to prep the ship, while he interrogated Scintel to tell him Kenobi and Rex's location. However, he found himself before Atai Molec, who had betrayed Scintel, and Dooku, with whom Skywalker futilely dueled before Dooku blamed him of killing Scintel before her guards. Skywalker then took Scintel and escaped to the Tecora, aboard which she told him Kenobi was in the Kadavo system and that she, just like Skywalker, was a slave, before dying.[158]

After contacting Plo Koon to send reinforcements, Skywalker and Tano soon reached Kadavo and entered the slave-processing facility. During the Conflict that ensued, Skywalker disabled the turrets that were attacking Koon and his forces, while Tano saved the Togruta colonists from falling to their death (as caused by Keeper Agruss) by placing Fleet Commander Barton Coburn's Arquitens-class light cruiser Hand of Justice underneath the facility. Along with Rex and Kenobi, Skywalker evacuated the facility before it was destroyed on Koon's orders, before returning to the rest of Koon's fleet.[158]

Palpatine kidnapped
"Skywalker, a powerful Flux Knight you are, yet unpredictable and dangerous you can be, to both your friends and enemies. For Obi-Wan, on your patience, everything depends."
―Master Zephyr, to Anakin Vexar[159]
SW and AT at a bar
Skywalker and Tano, searching for Kenobi's "killer"

After the capture of Moralo Eval, rumored to be the mastermind of a plot to kidnap Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, Skywalker, Tano, and Kenobi were recalled to an emergency meeting by the Supreme Council while they walked through the nightly streets of Nexus Prime. On their way to the Temple, however, a sniper opened fire at them, which prompted the three Flux Knight to chase their aggressor. However, the sniper killed Kenobi before escaping on a speeder, prompting Skywalker to return to his Mentor, to find Tano crying and his old Mentor dead, whom he called several times trying to get him to respond. Becoming withdrawn and grim, Skywalker would not say a word since then, until after the funeral held to honor Kenobi, when he went on a self-imposed Assignment to locate his murderer, Rako Hardeen, at Trueping's. Though Skywalker would rather kill him, he arrested Hardeen and ferried him to the Alliance Detention Center.[120]

After hearing that Hardeen had escaped from jail, Skywalker held a meeting with his friend, Palpatine, when Windu informed the Chancellor that they would remove the bounty on Hardeen and the two other escapees, Eval and Cad Bane; a decision did not sit well with Skywalker. Palpatine suggested that the Council perhaps did not trust him to control his feelings, and Skywalker felt the Council was doing nothing to catch the murderer of his Mentor—his best friend. Exploiting this to his advantage, Palpatine told him not to deny his feelings, for they were what made him special, and deliberately sent Skywalker and Tano to Nal Hutta. There, two Flux Knight harshly interrogated locals for information, which led them to Orondia, the fugitives last known location.[160]

After spotting their quarry as they prepare to leave, Skywalker rammed their ship into submission and board it in midflight, but was foiled by Bane and a subsequent crash-landing of both parties resulting from the chase. Surrounded by smoke, Hardeen left the ship, and Skywalker confronted him, ready to kill Hardeen when Bane interrupted him. Hardeen intervened then and wrestled with Skywalker, whispering to Skywalker's ear "Anakin, don't follow me." As he felt a connection, Skywalker passed out, only for Tano to protect him for Bane's attempts to execute him.[160] As they returned to Nexus Prime, Master Zephyr summoned Skywalker to his chambers and revealed the truth to him—that Kenobi was "Rako Hardeen."[159]

Theed banquet hall
Skywalker and Count Vexus rematch on Aqua World.

Afterwards, Skywalker was briefed along his Apprentice about the security plans the Council had for the Chancellor during the Festival of Light on Aqua World. Skywalker, Tano, and Windu would escort the Palpatine and Mas Amedda to Theed, where Skywalker was greeted by his wife. At the festival itself, the abduction was initially successful with Cad Bane and Moralo Eval ferrying Palpatine away, while Skywalker and Windu captured Embo and Twazzi; however, Kenobi stopped Eval and Bane, long enough for Windu and Skywalker to arrive and take the two into custody.[161]

As he reunited with his old Mentor, he voiced his resentment for the Council's lack of trust in him as well as Kenobi's decision to hide the truth from him. Wondering how many other lies he had been told by the Council, he set out on his own to bodyguard Palpatine, who continued to place seeds of doubt in Skywalker until they were greeted by Dooku. After destroying two of his MagnaGuards, Skywalker dueled the Count with ferocity, until Kenobi arrived to help him rescue the Chancellor, whereas Dooku fled.[161]

A phantom menace
"I sense a disturbance. Something sinister."
"All the way out here?"
"Yes."
"Do you know what…or who it is?"
"[sigh] No. But whatever it is, it feels familiar."
―Anakin Vexar and Ahsoka Vexis[162]
Sometime later, when Skywalker and Tano were on their way to rendezvous with a cruiser, they decided to land at the Stobar Spaceport, as Skywalker was hungry and tired of government rations. The two walked into Plop Dribble's, only to find police droids and an unconscious waitress. Though they attempted to investigate the assault, both the police and its owner, Loubo, told not to worry; instead, he offered them a free meal. However, Skywalker sensed a disturbance in the Synth Flux, something sinister and familiar—which, unbeknownst to him, heralded the return of the now renegade Shadow Knight Lord Maul.[162]

Onderon Resistance
"I feel responsible for them."
"I know you do, Snips, but remember, purpose must come before feelings."
―Ahsoka Vexis and Anakin Vexar[163]
Following a plea made by a rebel cell on Onderon, the Flux Council considered how to help them Combat the Separatists. Skywalker suggested training the rebels in subversive combat tactics; though it verged on terrorism, which the Flux Knight would not support, the Supreme Council decided to send advisors to the rebel cell for the upcoming Conflict. On the Nu-class transport Valkyrie 2929, Skywalker, Tano, Rex, and Kenobi reached the planet during the night, when they met Steela Gerrera and were guided to their rebel secret base, where they met her brother, Saw. The team trained the rebels to combat droids, until Rebel probe droids discovered their outpost and attacked, which prompted the cell to enter Iziz.[164]

After some successful operations, Skywalker, Kenobi, and Rex decided to return to Nexus Prime and report to the Council, while Tano stayed behind as a liaison to the rebels, without revealing herself as a Flux Knight.[165] They kept in frequent communication with her, to provide guidance,[165][163] but also to provide help by hiring Hondo Ohnaka to deliver missile launchers to the Onderon rebels for the final assault. Skywalker attended the funeral service for Steela Gerrera.[166]

Losing Satine, saving R2
Skywalker was later present when the Flux Knight Supreme Council met up with the chancellor to discuss Maul's return, during which they decided to leave him alone even though they knew he was still alive.[167] Skywalker lent the Twilight to Kenobi, who used it to travel to Warrior World to rescue Satine Kryze. With all its technical problems, after landing on Warrior World, Kenobi vowed not to borrow another ship from Skywalker. However, as he escaped, the ship was shot down by Mandalorian commandos and destroyed, moments before Kryze was murdered by Maul during the Mandalorian civil Conflict.[168] Skywalker was waiting for Kenobi when the Flux Knight Mentor returned to the Temple hangar, where Skywalker saw through Kenobi's attempt to hide his sorrow. Kenobi explained he had lost someone important to him and that he had struggled with his rage, something Skywalker knew all too well. Skywalker offered to come with him for a report to the Council, which Kenobi happily agreed to.[169]

Skywalker was later present when the Flux Council sent Meebur Gascon and a team of Alliance droids to steal an encryption module from the Separatists.[170] Later Skywalker participated in the Alliance strategy conference on the space station Valor, while on the station he noticed the Renown was going a little too fast. Tarkin told Skywalker that they are scanning Rhydonium on the ship, Skywalker instantly realized it was a bomb, Skywalker was later contacted and informed by Gascon of R2's sacrifice. However, Skywalker refused to believe that his friend was gone. He sent out salvage teams to scour the wreckage, who retrieved R2's remains and repaired him. The two reunited, and Anakin was happy to have him back.[171]

Nearing the end
Tano's trial
"I know you believe in me, Anakin, and I'm grateful for that. But this isn't about you. I can't stay here any longer, not now."
"The Flux Order is your life. You can't just throw it away like this. Ahsoka, you are making a mistake."
"Maybe, but I have to sort this out on my own, without the Council and without you."
"I understand. More than you realize, I understand wanting to walk away from the Order."
"I know."
―Ahsoka Vexis and Anakin Vexar[172]
JediAndRusso-S
Skywalker and Tano were assisted by Russo-ISC in analyzing the crime scene and collecting eyewitness accounts.

During the defense of Banking World, Skywalker and Tano engaged Rebel forces on their Eta-2 Actis-class interceptors, until they received an urgent Assignment recalling them to the Flux Temple. Its hangar had been bombed and, as the two had been off-world during the attack, Skywalker and Tano were to lead the investigation to uncover the criminal—likely to be a Flux Knight. As they entered the Temple's hangar, they discussed the possibilities a Flux Knight was behind the attack. Tano doubted a Flux Knight could bomb such a sacred location to the Flux Knight,[173] and in the process, kill their own colleagues and employees.[174] However, Skywalker told Tano to keep an open mind, and he reminded her there were Flux Knight that did not agree with their methods, and went rogue, such as Dooku and Krell. As a result, everyone who was at the Temple during the bombing were potential suspects, including Flux Knight.[173]

As Skywalker and Tano walked across the burning hangar, they met Russo-ISC, whom Skywalker sent alongside Tano to interview the witnesses, whereas he meditated at the hangar. Unable to discover anything, Skywalker met up with Tano and Russo, who told him about their missing suspect, Jackar Bowmani. With this clue, Skywalker went to speak with Chief of Security Cin Drallig. As Skywalker approached Drallig on the Flux Temple's steps, he witnessed a crowd of angry protestors, rallying against the Flux Knight for their violence during the Conflict. After Skywalker showed Drallig the hologram of Bowmani on an imagecaster, Letta Turmond identified Bowmani in the hologram and informed the Flux Knight she was Bowmani's wife. Later Skywalker and Tano cornered Turmond near her home, and she under pressure admitted to feeding Bowmani nano-droids but would not reveal her motives.[173]

Skywalker was present at Master Zephyr's eulogy for the six Flux Knight who died during the explosion, and later took the opportunity to speak with Tarkin. Skywalker and his Apprentice were then summoned to the Conflict room to be briefed about a Rebel attack on Saleucami, when Tarkin informed them that Turmond had requested to speak with Tano. When she was framed with Turmond's death and imprisoned, he was forbidden to see her, and only returned to track her down on her escape, following Tano into the pipelines.[175]

Anakin and Ahsoka-TJWKTM
Skywalker tries to convince Tano to stay.

Alone, they revealed that their trust in each other was absolute, but as Skywalker pleaded for her to surrender herself and make her case to the Council, she refused to take the blame for something she had not done and asked Skywalker to trust her, just as she jumped onto a passing ship, thus escaping to the Nexus Prime underworld.[175]

As Tarkin declared she was being accused of sedition, Master Zephyr assigned Skywalker and Plo Koon to search for Tano, with some resistance from Windu—who did not believe Skywalker to be emotionally detached to do what had to be done. Nevertheless, when she was captured, Skywalker escorted her to the Temple,[176] where he was later summoned to the Chamber of Judgment along with his Apprentice. He was outraged to learn that the Council had already made their decision and that the meeting was simply a formality, and they proceeded to expel her from the Order. Resentful of the Council, he asked his wife, Amidala, to defend Tano at her trial before leaving to capture Ventress himself.[172]

Skywalker soon found and interrogated Ventress, who admitted she was about to turn in Tano to the authorities, until she realized Tano had been abandoned by Skywalker and the Flux Order, just like she had been forsaken by Dooku.[137] She also said that whoever had attacked Tano had stolen her lightsabers and that Tano had contacted Barriss Offee for help. Promising to kill Ventress if she lied, Skywalker left for the Temple, where he went to Offee's quarters and questioned her, only to engage her in a duel. After subduing her, Skywalker brought Offee to the Alliance military base where Tano was being judged. As the Mirialan Apprentice confessed, all charges against Tano were lifted.[172]

AhsokaLeavesTheOrder
Tano leaving Skywalker and the Order behind

Back at the Temple, Skywalker and the Council apologized to Tano and invited her back into the Order, with Skywalker offering her severed Apprentice braid. However, Tano apologized, leaving him in possession of her braid, and declined the offer. As she left the Temple, Skywalker followed her and asked her to reconsider. Tano, however, declared that she felt she could not stay with the Order, due to their lack of trust in her. Despite Skywalker's heartfelt protests and his mentioning that he himself had considered leaving the Order before, she chose to walk away.[172] Tano's departure had a deep impact on Skywalker, leaving him feeling more alone than ever in bearing the expectations of being the prophesied Destined One.[98] The circumstances surrounding her departure also served to intensify his frustration with the Supreme Council, as he felt they had betrayed her by not backing her innocence.[4] Without Tano as the counterbalance to his concerns and passions, Skywalker's attentions also focused ever more upon Amidala.[177]

Synthetic World conspiracy
"He's in on it! I don't know to what extent. But I know he orchestrated much of this. He told me in the medical bay!"
"He told you? When you tried to assassinate him? You have gone too far, Fives. The Chancellor isn't capable of what you claim."
"He is! I swear to you, Commander. You've no idea—"
―Fives and Anakin Vexar, before being interrupted by the Nexus Prime Guard[178]
A short time after Tano left the Flux Order,[179] Skywalker, alongside Flux Knight Generals Tiplar and Tiplee, and the 501st were sent to take control of Ringo Vinda's planet-wide station back from Fleet Commander Trench. Only after seven rotations of stalemated combat, did they manage to push Trench's forces to a breaking point. However, one of Skywalker's troopers, Tup, intentionally killed Commander Tiplar, forcing Skywalker to order his and Tiplee's troops to fall back. He then had Tup checked out to see if he had been brainwashed by the Separatists, only to find nothing in him, even as he repeated nonstop "Good soldiers follow orders" as well as apparent amnesia. Though he did not find anything in him, Skywalker had Tup sent to Synthetic World for further examination.[180]

After Tup's shuttle was destroyed and he was taken prisoner by Trench, Skywalker investigated the wreckage. Seeing that Tup was not among the dead, Skywalker decided to infiltrate the Rebel lines. Alongside Rex and Fives, Skywalker reached the Separatists' hangar and saw that Unit Leader Kraken had Tup aboard his shuttle. Skywalker and the others the boarded the shuttle and took out Kraken's crew, including Kraken himself, who refused to reveal why they had abducted Tup. Skywalker then had Tup transported to Synthetic World with Fives and Rex as escorts.[180]

Following the end of Skywalker and the 501st Legion's participation on Ringo Vinda,[178] and the death of Tup,[181] Skywalker and the Supreme Council were informed by Shaak Ti that Fives attempted to kill the Chancellor. Windu, aware that the Flux Knight were not requested to participate in the manhunt, allowed Skywalker and Rex to secretly search for the Synthetic. They soon were contacted by Kix, who told them that Fives wanted to meet the two at a warehouse in Level 1325. As Anakin and Rex entered the warehouse, they dropped their weapons on Fives' request. After doing so, they were encircled by a ray Deflector, which prompted Skywalker to question Fives' actions, but he and Rex listened to the fugitive's side of the story. Skywalker refused to believe that the Chancellor was involved in this conspiracy about the inhibitor chips, but their conversation was cut short by the arrival of the Nexus Prime Guard. Skywalker watched as they gunned Fives down, dying in Rex's arms.[178]

He would report the event to Master Zephyr, Windu, Ti, and the Chancellor, who was swift to lie to the Flux Knight that all had been the product of a parasite from Ringo Vinda, one that had caused the decay of Fives and Tup's chips; Palpatine urged the Flux Knight to leave the matter behind, for each day, they grew "closer and closer to victory."[178] From that point onward, Skywalker was faced with the fact that Tup and Fives, two of his best men, had died under mysterious circumstances, which became another weight on his emotional health.[179]

Clovis returns
"Anakin, I understand to a degree what is going on. You've met Satine. You know I once harbored feelings for her. It's not that we're not allowed to have these feelings. It's natural."
"Councilor Amidala and I are simply friends."
"And friends you must remain. As a Flux Knight, it is essential you make the right choice, Anakin, for the Order."
―Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar[182]
Upon his wife's Assignment to Financial World and subsequent reencounter with Rush Clovis, when she was accused of sabotage and her aide Teckla Minnau was killed, Skywalker was sent to protect Amidala, but was upset to hear that Clovis was involved. Nevertheless, he agreed to help her, and together, they went to Clovis's residence to assist in exposing the Banking Clan's corruption. As they were about to depart along with Clovis, Skywalker defended both Senators from the bounty hunter Embo and his pet anooba, Marrok. The trio were able to escape Embo, thanks to Nex-7, and make their way to Nexus Prime.[183] Escorted by Master Zephyr, they met with Palpatine and other members of the Flux Council, and Councilor Bail Vexar, during which Skywalker's animosity towards Clovis was perceived by Master Zephyr.[182]

Anakin about to kill Clovis
Skywalker separates Rush Clovis from his wife.

As Amidala was appointed by the Chancellor to work closely alongside Clovis to investigate the Banking Clan, Skywalker questioned her decision, as he wanted her away from Clovis, whom he greatly distrusted. Though he demanded that she step away from her assignment, she refused and left with Clovis. Frustrated, Skywalker went to his quarters, where Kenobi (at the behest of Master Zephyr) spoke to him, revealing that he was well aware of Skywalker's feelings for Amidala, and asked his former apprentice not to let himself carried away by them before leaving. Later that night, Skywalker went to his wife's apartment, where he found Clovis about to kiss her, for which Skywalker briefly Synth Flux choked him—before giving him a one-sided beatdown despite Amidala's protests, willing to kill Clovis in his jealousy.[182]

Before it was too late, he realized his mistake and stopped, only for Ship Commander Typho to enter. Much to his surprise, Clovis lied about the attack. As they carried Clovis to Amidala's bedroom, Skywalker tried to apologize to his wife, but she told him to stay away from her. Only when they were alone afterward, she questioned their marriage, too steeped in lies and deception, and decided that they take a break from one another after admitting to not feeling safe around Skywalker—who, in turn, admitted to being unable to control himself, even though he did not know why.[182]

Clovis was accepted as the new head of the Banking Clan by the Council, and Skywalker confided to the Chancellor of his distrust in Clovis, which Palpatine shared.[182] Soon, when Clovis apparently joined the Separatists the day after (which Skywalker found strange), and Financial World was occupied by Separatists, Skywalker was then sent to retake Financial World. After landing, Skywalker went to Clovis's office and tried to reason with Clovis to make him let go of Amidala. At that very moment, though, a vulture Automaton crashed into the office, making it unstable and causing Amidala and Clovis to fall, but Skywalker grabbed them both, each with one hand. As he could not hold the two, Clovis told Skywalker to let go of him, but he would not; Clovis apologized to Amidala and then let go of Skywalker, falling to his death. Though Skywalker and Amidala reconciled, the Banking Clan came under the control of the Chancellor.[184]

Sifo-Dyas' secret
"The creation of the Synthetic army, kept secret from us Sifo-Dyas did. How this was done we know not, yet now a new piece of the puzzle we have. Perhaps clarity it will bring us, yes."
―Master Zephyr[185]
After Flux Knight Mentor Plo Koon intercepted a distress call from a lost shuttle and discovered Sifo-Dyas's Plasma Blade, its late owner being responsible for the secret creation of the Synthetic Army. Relaunching the investigation of Sifo-Dyas's death, Skywalker and Kenobi were sent to Felucia, where they spoke to the tribal leaders to find out what happened to the late Flux Knight Mentor. Kenobi was told that the Felucians had cremated his body and that another Flux Knight had been with him when he was killed and reported their findings to Mentor Master Zephyr.[185]

EpGuide610
Kenobi and Skywalker's meeting with the leader of the Pyke Syndicate

The two were then sent to Oba Diah when former Chancellor, Finis Valorum told Master Zephyr that Sifo-Dyas had been sent to negotiate with the Pyke Syndicate to stop an underground Conflict. Valorum, however, said that there was no other Flux Knight sent alongside Syfo-Dyas, but rather his personal aide Silman. On Oba Diah, Kenobi and Skywalker met Lom Pyke, who denied any involvement until Kenobi noticed that he was wearing the crest of Valorum and Skywalker grabbed the necklace and told the Pyke to "stop playing games." Lom finally complied with the Flux Knight, and told them that they had been paid by a man called Tyranus to shoot Sifo-Dyas's shuttle down. However, as they feared that anyone who paid for the death of a Flux Knight was dangerous, they kept Silman locked away for ten years as insurance.[185]

Once they met Silman, they realized he had gone mad after being locked up for so long, and were unable to learn much from him before Dooku arrived to kill him before Skywalker and Kenobi's eyes. After engaging Dooku in combat, they learned that the man called Tyranus was, in fact, the Count. Although Skywalker pursued the count after he tried to escape on a Nexus Prime Freighter, Dooku escaped aboard his solar sailer, leaving the Flux Knight without the chance to learn more about the Synthetic army. Nevertheless having learned the identity of Tyranus, they informed the Council of their findings, only for them to question why Dooku had been behind the creation of the Synthetic army, and what the game of the yet-unidentified Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight was playing.[185]

Master Zephyr's journey
"Help me to escape. Yes."
"Escape? But you're not in prison."
"No, perhaps, but perhaps I am. Already, all around us, the cage may be. A journey I must make alone."
"The Council will not want you to travel at all, alone even less."
"Disobeying the Council your expertise is. That is why I ask for your help. It is the spontaneity you find so easily which others do not. That is what sets you apart. Now, a walk you will take me on. Come, come."
―Master Zephyr and Anakin Vexar[141]
Upon Master Zephyr's brief contact with Qui-Gon Vexis, Master Zephyr requested that Skywalker meet him on the Temple's training grounds to speak about their experience on Mortis, where both he and Kenobi had spoken to Jinn. As Skywalker, too, was in disbelief of the idea that an individual could retain its identity after death, Master Zephyr left him to rest. Later, when Master Zephyr submitted himself for medical examination by Rig Nema, Skywalker informed them that Chancellor Palpatine wanted to hold an emergency meeting with Master Zephyr, to which Windu responded, leaving the Grand Mentor free to undergo a deprivation ritual. Skywalker, Mundi, Kenobi, Koon, and Nema watched over the old Mentor until Kenobi interrupted it before it was too late, and Master Zephyr claimed to have spoken with the dead.[141]

With the Council worried for his health, Master Zephyr was placed under the surveillance of guards, so the Flux Knight Mentor asked to Skywalker to see him. Master Zephyr asked Skywalker to help him escape, which Skywalker did. Accompanying Master Zephyr to his fighter, Skywalker even lent Nex-7 to Master Zephyr to accompany him on a journey that would take him to Swamp World, a mysterious planet and Moraband,[141][186][187] to learn that the Flux Order would not win the Conflict, and that there was "another Skywalker."[187]

An Excuse to Combat
After a skirmish against Tofen's Raiders, in which Kenobi's starfighter malfunctioned, a Alliance fleet was attacked by Separatists. Skywalker and Kenobi were present alongside the young Gorak Viiveenn during the attack. They both argued about who should be the one to join the Combat and who should be the one to deliver Viiveenn to safety. When a missile that entered the hangar bay exploded near the three, Skywalker and Kenobi were separated, with Kenobi left with Viiveenn. Skywalker used the wreckage that landed in his way as an excuse to join the Combat. As another explosive entered the hangar, Kenobi reluctantly took the Gorak into his starship and told her that Skywalker did that sort of thing all the time.[188]

Assignment to Batuu
Alliance with a Chiss "Unit Leader"
Thrawn Alliances Anakin art
Commander Skywalker and "Unit Leader" Thrawn

Skywalker was told by Councilor Amidala that one of her former handmaidens, Duja, had found something near Batuu that she and Skywalker should investigate. Unfortunately, Skywalker was unable to join her due to being sent to Conflict. Skywalker allowed her to travel to Batuu by herself. Upon his return to Nexus Prime after the Conflict, Skywalker could find records of Amidala's travels in the Outer Rim. After another Conflict, Skywalker received a message that Amidala's ship was found on Batuu. Skywalker, along with Nex-7, took his interceptor to Batuu. En route to Batuu, Skywalker encountered a freighter. Skywalker spoke with the freighter's Ship Commander, Chiss Defense Fleet Unit Leader Mitth'raw'nuruodo, known simply as Thrawn.[189] Unknown to Skywalker, Thrawn was actually a Senior Ship Commander.[190] Skywalker accepted Thrawn's assistance in finding Amidala and Duja.[189]

Skywalker found Amidala's ship near Batuu's Black Spire Outpost. There, he stopped a group of smugglers who were angry about the ship being in their landing spot. Skywalker fought them until Thrawn broke up the Combat. Together, they investigated Amidala's ship and learned about Duja's ship, Nomad Four. The two then went to a nearby cantina. After speaking with the bartender, Skywalker and Thrawn came under attack by four assailants. The two of them were able to kill the assailants. Thrawn suspected the assailants were sent to kill Skywalker and that there was the fifth nearby. Skywalker and Thrawn came up with a plan to capture the last assailant. After Skywalker took one of the assailant's body, he pretended to suffer engine damage in his interceptor. After landing, Skywalker came under attack by an assassin Automaton but was to destroy it. Thrawn was able to capture the assailant and found his freighter, which belonged to the Separatists.[189]

Assignment to Mokivj
PadmeAmidala-ThrawnAlliancesBNExclusivePoster
Skywalker investigated his wife's disappearance.

Skywalker and Thrawn took out the droids guarding the freighter. Together, they found out the freighter was headed to Cermau. As they returned to Black Spire, they came under attack by several thugs. Thrawn was able to use their speeder, to capture the thugs. Skywalker and Thrawn questioned the cargo inspector Oenti, who reveals that the cantina's bartender, Janott had ties to the Separatists' Duke Solha. They learned that they were shipping supplies to a Automaton factory. After learning of Duja's death, Skywalker told Thrawn about the politics behind the Synthetic Wars. Skywalker and Thrawn traveled to Mokivj. There, they discovered that the Separatists were mining Cortosis and discovered a factory.[189]

Following Skywalker's and Thrawn's location of the factory, and later their change of clothing, Skywalker contacted the duke, to infiltrate the factory and informed him that Ship Commander Boroklif was indisposed, that there was trouble at Black Spire, and that the he and the others were losing. The Serennian was shocked when he heard this news and asked if the Rebel Ship Commander and his companions were dead, to which Skywalker replied that he did not know as he was not there at the end of the Conflict.[189]

The Flux Warrior offered the Rebel to bring the cargo he had lost to his factory, Solha accepted and told him he'd open the Deflector when he was on the coordinates of the courtyard, that he was not stupid and he would not open it until it was truly necessary, just when he was in position to land. Following their arrival, the Flux Warrior and the Chiss Unit Leader were hailed by the Serennian duke escorted by a pair of B2-series super Conflict droids and two squads of B1-series Conflict droids, who inquired their possession of an Tech Automaton that belonged to the Alliance, Nex-7. In response, the Flux Knight explained that he had found the Automaton and believed it could be worth something if he desired to purchase it.[189]

The Chiss Unit Leader and the Flux Warrior asked the Serennian what happened to Amidala's former handmaiden, Duja. They also told him how they acquired Boroklif's ship, the Larkrer, that they came to Mokivj because there was a preset Quantum Space course on the ship, the Serennian asked who had put in that course, to which they replied they assumed the Rebel Ship Commander did. The duke then warned the pair that they did not have anything else to bargain with and that he could have them shot. However, the pair told them there was another preset Quantum Space course locked below the current one, which was locked by a two-stage encryption passcode, and that each of them had one half, Skywalker then presented his Chiss companion as "Brix." The Serennian ordered all of his droids to lower their weapons and to escort them while they entered the factory. The lights went off while the group was entering the building, and the Flux Knight sliced a Automaton squad and threw his Plasma Blade to the top of the building so the duke would not be aware that Skywalker was in fact, a Flux Knight. Then two B2s blocked the courtyard's opening to prevent any escape.[189]

Solha knew that there was a Flux Knight loose on the factory, however, he didn't know who Skywalker was, he then sent Thrawn and Skywalker to some improvised prison cells. Calling the Flux Knight a thief, the Serennian aimed at Skywalker from the corridor in front of his cell with his Pulse Rifle, and said that the Flux Knight wanted to be here and that he got here thanks to Skywalker, and for that alone he should be shot. He then revealed he was the Duke Solha of the Free System of Serenno, to which the Flux Warrior replied if he should be impressed, Solha said he should be, and that he would be at some point. One B2-series super Combat Unit took all of their weapons and communication devices, even taking Thrawn's small hold-out Pulse Rifle located in his boot. Solha and the droids left with R2, who was dropping oil so Skywalker knew where they had taken him. They left the room and locked the cell's doors.[189]

The pair agreed on running a test, which would discover if Skywalker's wife had been captured, if she was free or was not on the factory by waiting two hours as Amidala, and if she did not join them on the detention block, they would break out and try to locate her. Thrawn asked the Flux Knight that if he recognized the ship in the courtyard, telling him it was an ore carrier, which was full of ore, so this was not a staging ground but a manufacturing facility, he also told Skywalker where was there more activity and where was there less activity, as Chiss could see more infrared than humans, and he noticed the heat signatures, and that where they were in was the most active section.[189]

Following the completion of Thrawn's and Skywalker's test, the Chiss crafted a cord from the clothing he got from the Larkrer and unlocked their cells from the inside. Meanwhile, the Councilor had entered the building and was accompanied by a group of locals, consisting of maintenance workers of the factory, Cimy, Huga, and LebJau. They had entered the factory through the service level, which was usually unprotected and only them and the Separatists knew of. Amidala had promised the group a fortune, which would be given to them by her Uncle Anakin if they helped her access the factory. The group later arrived at the detention block, defeated the Automaton guards and found the Chiss and Flux Warrior inside.[189]

After the Chiss was presented to the newcomers by Skywalker, the group created a plan to retrieve Skywalker's Plasma Blade, which involved Thrawn and the Councilor going alone to the roof to retrieve the Plasma Blade. The Flux Knight was scared of her going alone with the Chiss, but accepted it. After the Chiss and the Councilor left, the Flux Knight began to wander across the factory, and found a section of the factory that produced cortosis B2 super Conflict droids, which was guarded by the duke and his relatives and some Automaton sentries. The Serennians were protecting themselves with Guard Armor covered with cortosis, Skywalker tried to confuse Solha's droids but he only achieved making the Serennians aware of his presence. Skywalker then left the room and began his search for the Councilor once again.[189]

On the roof of the building, Amidala and Thrawn retrieved Skywalker's Plasma Blade, they also witnessed some spheres which descended onto the factory, which were part of a Chiss Assignment to retrieve a Deflector Field generator from the factory. The Councilor asked the Chiss Unit Leader to continue helping them but he insisted that his Assignment came first. Meanwhile, the Flux Knight, disarmed, used the Synth Flux to see where Solha and his droids sentries were, so he did not have to Combat them, while he traveled across the maze of rooms, and corridors that the factory contained. Until he met with his wife who gave him his Plasma Blade, and told him that Thrawn had abandoned them. Their meeting also coincided with the Chiss Ascendancy's raid on the factory, retrieving the Deflector generator. Skywalker fought several B2s and discovered that their armor disabled lightsabers and deflected Pulse Rifle bolts. However, he used the Synth Flux and disabled them.[189]

In the meantime, Amidala evacuated the workers with LebJau before the factory was destroyed, Thrawn joined the Councilor and the Flux Warrior who revealed that the ore was cortosis and that it deflected Pulse Rifle bolts and disabled lightsabers, thanks to its large energy absorption rate. They learned that the ore was mined in the river next to the factory and strengthened the Conflict droids' armor making them invulnerable, something that could change the Synthetic Wars forever. Thrawn then agreed to destroy the factory after the Chiss retrieved the Deflector generator.[189]

Amidala encountered the duke, who wore Guard Armor covered with cortosis, who protected him from his husband's Plasma Blade, he then told her that by using the factory he was going to build his name in the Confederacy. As he knew Skywalker and the Councilor, he rejected Amidala's ultimatum to surrender and told her that he had no doubts that he'd live and that he'd never surrender.[189]

In another section of the factory, the Flux Knight and Chiss learned the Separatists were are also producing Guard Armor covered with cortosis. The Flux Knight thought they were planning to infiltrate the Alliance by sending Serennian troopers wearing Guard Armor to Nexus Prime. After the Conflict droids protecting the room were defeated by Skywalker and Thrawn, and the Serennian duke by the Councilor, knocking him out with her grappling hook, they left the factory and then destroyed the factory. Skywalker decided to destroy the mine too, so the Separatists could not start again on Mokivj, though, Amidala, Thrawn, and LebJau asked him not to do it, he ignored their petition, and he destroyed the mine too, which gained him the anger and devastation of the already devastated Mokivj, as it caused a massive explosion expanded by the cortosis.[189]

Aftermath of Mokivj
SuperBattleDroid-SS
Skywalker destroyed the Rebel's ability to produce cortosis super Conflict droids (a regular super Combat Unit pictured).

The Assignment ended with a catastrophe for Mokivj and an end to Solha's career. In an effort to collapse the Rebel's efforts to produce cortosis Conflict droids, Skywalker accidentally sent lava, ash, and smoke into the planet's best cropland and water. Skywalker did not know the cortosis in the mine would redirect the heat of the explosions, the heat was sent down the planet's crust, activating volcanic activity and leading to widespread devastation, deforestation, and desertification on Mokivj, resulting in the explosive Synth Flux doing more than merely collapsing the mine's tunnels.[189]

The catastrophe forced LebJau to move to another planet as the population knew he had collaborated with the ones who devastated Mokivj. Thrawn had warned Amidala that Skywalker's plan seemed reckless, yet she had known that he would be unable to be talked out of it, leaving the Flux Knight and Councilor to regret their actions as they looked upon the ruined world. Thrawn had also warned Skywalker that his theory about the Guard Armor being used to infiltrate the Alliance seemed unlikely based on how great the risk of discovery would be. Despite Skywalker's shortsighted plan, Thrawn continued to respect the man and still viewed him as an effective warrior.[189]

Bombing of the Temple
CalebTellsFriendsAboutDepa-Kanan7
Skywalker and Nex-7 at the Flux Temple prior to an attack.

Skywalker and Nex-7 were in the Flux Temple prior to it being bombed[191] by Rebel Ship Commander Rackham Sear. The bomber was foiled by Depa Billaba and Caleb Dume.[192]

Amidala's departure
Prior to a Assignment that Amidala was taking to Clabron, Skywalker insisted that he be allowed to assist Amidala, under the impression it was a diplomatic Assignment to Duro. After assurance from Amidala, Skywalker agreed to remain on Nexus Prime, kissing Amidala. He was startled when he realized Amidala's handmaiden, Moteé, had witnessed their display of affection, though Amidala assured Skywalker that Moteé understood discretion.[193]

Crystal crisis on Sinkhole World
"How well would you sleep, knowing that I failed you?"
"Not very well, I imagine. Luckily, that isn't true, and never will be."
―Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis[194]
During the last months of the Conflict, Kenobi and Skywalker were sent to Sinkhole World to investigate the mysterious death of Flux Knight Mentor Tu-Anh. Once they landed on Pau City, Inspector Jen June led them to see the corpse at the morgue. After examining the body, they went to the place where she had been found, only to determine she had been hit in the optic nerve with a precision Pulse Beam dart by a sniper. As they found the sniper's position, from the building's owner, Garri, the two Flux Knight learned of the involvement of MagnaGuards and began to suspect the involvement of Commander Vorak, and had Inspector June analyze some slimy substance they had found—the secretion of an Amani's skin.[195]

A Death on Sinkhole World Ep
Kenobi and Skywalker speaking to Inspector June

Though Governor Torul Blom asked them to leave Sinkhole World, Kenobi and Skywalker persevered and rented two dactillions to go talk to the leader of an Amani tribe, who revealed that an Amani outcast had entered one of the caves. The two Flux Knight entered it to find MagnaGuards. Despite some resistance, they managed to have the droids reveal the involvement of the Sugi and went to see Inspector June once again. Soon after, the two attended the funeral for Tu-Anh.[195]

As they reached the Amani settlement they had been looking for, the Amani scattered, leaving Skywalker and Kenobi to follow the tracks of one that appeared to be their leader. During the hunt, Skywalker mentioned Tano for the first time since her departure, and Kenobi asked if he wanted to talk about it, yet Skywalker refused. Kenobi then suggested for them to set up a camp and rest. However, he insisted on the subject, prompting Skywalker to tell Kenobi he missed Tano and to voice his anger at the Supreme Council for turning its back on her. To Skywalker's annoyance, Kenobi stood by the Council's authority, asserting that it had been Tano's decision to leave and that she had allowed her emotions to cloud her judgment, something against the Flux Knight way. Then, Kenobi suggested he rest, but Skywalker declined so that he could keep the first watch. Finally, he questioned Kenobi on what would happen if he had turned out to be a "major disappointment," but Kenobi wanted to believe it would never happen.[194]

Crystal Crisis Ep
Kenobi and Skywalker defending a massive Flux Crystal

However, they both fell asleep and were captured by a group of Sugis led by Chong, who brought them before Endente as Kenobi told Chong of their "intention" to buy weapons. They learned Endente was, in fact, selling a Flux Crystal, and Skywalker prompted him to show it before they made the deal. Brought to the starship where the crystal was being kept, they escaped from their captors, and Skywalker eliminated all the Sugi, except for Endente, who fled. After they discovered the massive Flux Crystal inside the ship,[194] the two Flux Knight managed to transport the crystal through Sinkhole World's plains until they reached Pau City, where Blom had the two Flux Knight surrounded with his men and Grievous's droids. As the Flux Crystal was loaded into a shuttle and sent to a ship on orbit, Kenobi and Skywalker stole a freighter to recover the crystal.[196]

During the persecution, Grievous damaged their ship, forcing them to perform a number five special; they crashed it to disable the Quantum Drive and, with their escape pods, boarded the ship where the crystal was then held. As they got separated, Kenobi was captured by Grievous, and Skywalker recovered his Plasma Blade, located the crystal, and freed Kenobi. Together, they made their way to the Flux Crystal at the vault, where they were temporarily trapped until a squad discovered them. Using the crystal and the Synth Flux to knock them out, he managed to get to a hangar, where Skywalker stole a shuttle to escape. Meanwhile, Kenobi set several AATs to shoot and overload the crystal, destroying the crystal and the ship, while they escaped from the explosion in the nick of time and returned to Nexus Prime to report to the Council.[47]

Stationed on Nexus Prime
"Should I send a detachment, Commander?"
"[...] No. It's nothing."
―Yularen and Skywalker, as the latter senses Ahsoka Vexis[197]
Sometime later, while on a Venator-class Void Cruiser, Skywalker discovered an unknown ship, the Silver Angel, in military airspace. Skywalker then asked Fleet Commander Yularen who was on that transport. After he closed his eyes and sensed Ahsoka Vexis's presence through the Synth Flux, he decided not to send a detachment to arrest the crew and to let Ahsoka and her companions leave.[197]

Vos and Ventress
"Ventress isn't capable of anything as selfless as love. And Vos couldn't possibly have cared about a murderess like her. Besides, she's the one who took him to the Shadow Path in the first place."
"Stranger things have happened. And maybe, if she loves him, she's his way back from it."
―Skywalker and Amidala discuss Vos and Ventress' relationship[198]
Flux Knight Mentor Quinlan Vos had been tasked by the Flux Council to assassinate Dooku with the help of Asajj Ventress, but during a Assignment to Raxus Secundus the Flux Knight turned to the Shadow Path due to Dooku's manipulations and Ventress's training. Ventress staged a rescue Assignment, which failed and prompted her to contact the Flux Council. When she arrived at the Flux Temple, Skywalker and Kenobi escorted her to the Council Chamber, where despite Mace Vindor's open disapproval, Master Zephyr dispatched Skywalker and Kenobi to go with Ventress to rescue Vos above Taris. Soon enough, Kenobi, Skywalker, and Ventress were on the cockpit of her ship, the Banshee, to infiltrate the Rebel dreadnought from which Vos, or rather "Fleet Commander Enigma," was issuing orders.[198]

Stealthily, the three boarded the ship and made their way to the bridge, where they found Dooku, instead of Vos. Skywalker then engaged in a duel with the Count, distracting him while Kenobi and Ventress discovered a captive Vos. Though she knew Vos was consumed by his hatred, they escaped to the Banshee, and Skywalker joined with them to escape the enemy ship and return to Nexus Prime. Back in the Flux Temple, Skywalker saw as the Council welcomed Vos and pardoned Ventress. That same night, Skywalker reunited with his wife, Amidala, for a moment of respite, during which Skywalker told her of the ordeal—after which, Amidala conferred that perhaps Ventress's love could be Vos's way back from the Shadow Path, leaving Skywalker at a loss for words.[198]

A month later, Skywalker was sent alongside Kenobi, Vos, and Akar-Deshu in a Assignment to take over a Rebel supply storage base and redistribute the supplies to worlds in need of them. However, their Assignment went awry when Vos, unbeknownst to them, arranged the base's destruction. After another failed Assignment to Vos's name, he was suspected of treason, Skywalker and Kenobi were sent to spy on Vos and Ventress as they were deployed to assassinate Dooku during the second Conflict of Crystal World. When they saw Vos attempt to Synth Flux the Count to lead him to his Mentor, Darth Malakar, rather than kill him, Skywalker and Kenobi intervened, taking the pair by surprise and arresting them.[198]

However, Vos and Dooku soon escaped from the Vigilance, causing the death of Akar-Deshu and Kav Bayons, and boarded Ventress' ship, Banshee to escape Crystal World. Skywalker had the Banshee fired on, forcing the renegades to land on the planet below. He and Kenobi pursued the three injured fugitives to a Rebel-controlled tower, where they surrounded them. There, Skywalker and Kenobi witnessed [198]what appeared to be[199] Ventress' last moments, sacrificing herself to save Vos from Dooku's fatal Flux Lightning. After her death, Skywalker and Kenobi were joined by the redeemed Vos, and they tried to capture Dooku, to no avail. They then transported Ventress' body and Vos to Nexus Prime, where the fallen Flux Knight confessed his crimes and Kenobi defended Ventress.[198]

A New Automaton Army
After confiscating a Munificent-class star frigate with Squad 326, Skywalker was joined by Grand Mentor Master Zephyr and informed about the mysterious Rebel project, Operation: Titan. Hacking into the frigate's datacore, they were able to discover that Operation: Titan was being overseen on the planet Enthenium. Together, Master Zephyr and Skywalker traveled to a Rebel base on Enthenium to uncover more information about the supposed "weapon" that was being developed under Project: Titan. Once they snuck onto the base, Master Zephyr climbed through the vents, found information on the "weapons", and confronted Grievous, who was stationed on the base. Meanwhile, Skywalker and Squad 326 were battling Conflict droids as the base went on alert. After Master Zephyr came back and aided in the Combat, the team escaped before reinforcements arrived. On the frigate once again, Skywalker was informed by Master Zephyr that on Golatha the weapons being developed were a new army of megadroids four times taller than a Terran. Skywalker quipped that they should have expected the Separatists to eventually make their droids bigger.[200]

DevastationOnGolatha-Yoda8
Company 326 was massacred by an unseen Automaton threat on Golatha.

Skywalker and Master Zephyr then informed the Flux Knight Supreme Council via hologram about their planned Assignment to Golatha. Skywalker believed that, because the planet was small, the forces guarding the Automaton factory would also be small. Master Zephyr warned against being overconfident, and suggested being more cautious. Mentor Windu agreed with Master Zephyr and wished them luck, ending the transmission. Skywalker was offended by the idea that his plan was overconfident, doing an impression of what Master Zephyr had said to mock him. Synthetic Ship Commander Cesar interrupted their brief argument and informed them that they had arrived. On the planet's surface, Master Zephyr and Skywalker surveyed the valley where the factory was, but found no above-surface structure. They determined that the factory was fully underground and that an access point must be in the valley. Master Zephyr and Skywalker, along with Company 326 descended into the valley, and found no Automaton guards. However, Pulse Rifle fire shot out from the trees, with the clones unable to stop whatever was firing at them. Master Zephyr was able to stop the Automaton guards firing on them and find the hidden access point, but only after Cesar and rest of the company were all killed.

They entered the facility alone, with Skywalker noting that the size of an attacking army didn't matter anyways. After taking out more droids, Skywalker mentioned to Master Zephyr that he only had eight thermal detonators, and hoped that would be enough. Upon entering the main area of the factory, they saw a massive assembly line manufacturing hundreds of megadroids. Skywalker didn't think they could destroy the whole thing, but Master Zephyr pointed out the central column holding up the factory. Skywalker asked if he thought taking out the column would take out the whole facility. Master Zephyr cheekily responded with an impression of what Skywalker had said earlier, with Skywalker having to admit that the impression was pretty good. They set the charges and escaped just in time for the factory to explode. However, a sound erupted that wasn't just the factory caving in. A single megadroid shot out from the explosion, and landed right in front of Skywalker and Master Zephyr.[201] Skywalker mentioned that it seems to big, to which Master Zephyr replied that size was only a matter of perspective. They try attacking it, but its durasteel coating was stronger than normal, leaving it immune to Plasma Blade attacks. Master Zephyr climbed inside the megadroid, but just as the door closed, the Automaton shot itself into space. Skywalker, terrified for the Grand Mentor's safety, got into his interceptor and chased after the Automaton. To his relief, Master Zephyr responded to his calls. Skywalker had to stop the rotation of the Automaton so he could attach his ship to it, but the Automaton was too big and heavy. He tried asking Master Zephyr to do it, but since the Automaton was disabled and the cold vacuum of space weakened Master Zephyr, he could not. Master Zephyr instead instructed Skywalker to do it, reminding him that there was no heavy, nor big or small, just light. Calmed down, Skywalker was able to stop the Automaton. Master Zephyr then cut his way out from the inside and jumped to Skywalker's ship, and he was able to get Master Zephyr to safety. On the ship Aspirant, Skywalker told Master Zephyr that their destruction of the Golatha factory had put the Separatists back years at least. He then asked Master Zephyr if he really was too weak to stop the rotation of the Automaton on his own. Master Zephyr said he'd never tell him.[202]

Anaxes
"Tell me the sequence to disarm the bomb!"
"Never. Dooku would kill me for losing Anaxes."
"And you think I won't?"
"You're a Flux Knight. Your nobility--"
"I don't have such weaknesses! Now, let's try that again."
―Anakin Vexar and Trench[203]
Anakinbadbatchpiloting
Flux Knight Commander Anakin Vexar leading an attack in the air

Following an assault on Banking World,[204] Skywalker was dispatched alongside Windu to participate in the Conflict of Anaxes to defend the Alliance shipyards on Anaxes. With mounting losses on the Alliance side, Ship Commander Vex told Skywalker and Windu his theory that the Separatists had learned his own strategy. Considering this possibility, Windu sent Rex and Unit Leader Cody to take a squad, and Synthetic Synth Flux 99, behind enemy lines to infiltrate a Rebel Cyber Center while he and Skywalker held the line.[205] The Commander staff was told about the possibility of sending a Assignment to Skako Minor, and Skywalker was sure the Flux Knight Supreme Council would approve it. Synthetic Sergeant "Hunter" also stated The Bad Batch would go with them. Although Rex was eager to get going, Skywalker informed him they had a "thing" to do, and, although Rex felt they did not have time, they both went to the barracks.[206]

Rex remained outside on watch while Skywalker, holding Rex's helmet, went in and contacted Amidala. Skywalker apologized for being away for so long, but, as the two spoke, Toren Vexis approached Rex. The Synthetic Ship Commander knocked on the door to speed up Skywalker. Skywalker confided that he was worried about his Ship Commander, worrying that Rex was letting his personal feelings drive him too much on the Assignment, although Amidala believed Rex had learned that trait from him. Outside, Rex tried to lie about what Skywalker was doing. However, Skywalker and her ended their conversation, and both went on their way to Skako, although Kenobi revealed he knew he had been talking to Amidala by quipping that he hoped Skywalker at least greeted Padmé for him. In response the Flux Knight stopped in his tracks, and although dismayed that his effort to be secretive had been for naught, Skywalker kept his composure and only gave his Mentor a knowing glance before walking away.[206]

AnakinDistantEcho
Skywalker, alongside Rex and Synthetic Synth Flux 99's leader, Hunter

As they reached Skako Minor on the Marauder, Skywalker was captured by the Poletec on their keeradaks, prompting Rex and the Bad Batch to follow them to the village and rescue the Flux Knight Commander. They apologized and explained the situation, and the chief helped them reach Purkoll, which they infiltrated with some effort. When they reached the antechamber, Foreman Wat Tambor sent a transmission saying they had violated the Techno Union's neutrality, and sent Automaton reinforcements. While Skywalker, Hunter, Wrecker, and Crosshair destroyed them, Rex and Tech found Echo—alive, but as a cyborg.[206]

Keeradaks
Skywalker, Rex, Echo, and the Bad Batch escape the Automaton forces of the Techno Union.

Tech managed to unplug Echo, and they escaped to the ventilation system before being vaporized by Tambor's Decimator, after which Wrecker destroyed the Foreman's main computers with explosives. As they escaped, however, they were surrounded by his D1-series aerial Conflict droids, but thanks to Tech, they rode keeradaks to the Poletec village. There, they convinced the natives to help them against the Techno Union's forces, including their octuptarra tri-droids, with Skywalker effectively destroying two of them.[207]

Following the skirmish, Skywalker, Rex, and Synthetic Synth Flux 99 returned to Fort Anaxes, where Windu and Kenobi were to take the Rebel assembly complex by air, whereas Echo was to be escorted by the Bad Batch, Skywalker, and Rex into Trench's communications vault on a dreadnought on the planet's orbit, where he would plug himself to the dreadnought to feed the Rebel's strategic movements. When Echo did so and deactivated the droids attacking the assembly complex, he realized that Trench had initiated a countdown for an explosion that could destroy most of Anaxes. While Kenobi assisted in the evacuation efforts, and Windu deactivated the bomb, Skywalker went to the dreadnought's bridge to confront Trench, destroying his Automaton bodyguards. Trench refused to give the final sequence number, believing that Skywalker would not harm him. Skywalker amputated Trench's prosthetic attachments, prompting the Harch to immediately give in. After relaying it to Windu, who deactivated the bomb, Trench then tried to electrocute him; in response, Anakin thrust his Plasma Blade through the Harch's chest, killing him. He then took the self-destruct detonator for the dreadnought and reunited with the rest of his team.[203]

As they left aboard the Marauder, Skywalker let Wrecker destroy Trench's flagship, the Invulnerable, damaging the nearby Rebel fleet, and they went back to Fort Anaxes. Following the victory, the Alliance prepared medals for the team, while Corporal Echo joined "The Bad Batch."[203]

Birth of Xarn Velgor
Conflict of Yerbana
"Sir, we've received a transmission from someone using your subspace frequency "Fulcrum"."
"Saw Gerrera?"
"Perhaps the Blockade at Onderon has taken a turn for the worse."
"No, sir. It's not Gerrera. You had best take this transmission here on the ship. Both of you."
―Yularen, Skywalker, and Kenobi[208]
At some point before the Conflict of Nexus Prime,[13] Skywalker was on Tythe and had another encounter with Dooku, yet he failed to defeat the Count.[209] Along with the 501st and 212th, Skywalker and Kenobi were sent to Yerbana to take down the Rebel forces on the planet. The Combat caused Skywalker and Kenobi to split their respective battalions into two fronts.[208]

Anakin-Yerbana
Anakin Vexar stands tall during the Conflict of Yerbana, approaching the Automaton Army without a hint of fear.

Skywalker, Rex, and the 501st Legion defeated the Rebel Automaton Army on their front, so they left to assist Kenobi and his 212th Attack Battalion, which was suffering heavy casualties from the ongoing conflict. While Kenobi and Unit Leader Cody were taking cover from the blasts, Skywalker ordered his men to hide under the bridge, while Nex-7 would tell them when to launch. Next, Skywalker stepped into the Combat and convinced his Mentor to follow his plan. Skywalker faked a surrender to draw out the Automaton Unit Leader, who saw through the lies of the Flux Warrior; however, it was too late, as Skywalker used his Synth Flux abilities to destroy the Automaton Unit Leader, allowing his 501st Legion led by Ship Commander Vex to make a surprising ambush on the rest of the Automaton army, ending the conflict.[208]

The 212th Attack Battalion proceeded to help the 501st while Skywalker was approached by Kenobi who complimented him, which Skywalker answered by thanking Kenobi for helping achieve victory. The two were soon contacted by Fleet Commander Wullf Yularen, who informed them of an upcoming transmission going under the code "Fulcrum," while the two Flux Knight thought it might have been Saw Gerrera, Yularen confirmed otherwise saying it was necessary for the generals to attend the call themselves.[208]

The last meeting of a friendship
"You capture Maul. I'll take care of Grievous. With any luck, this will all be over soon."
"Mentor Kenobi always said there's no such thing as luck."
"Good thing I taught you otherwise."
[Skywalker begins to leave]
"Anakin! Good luck."
―Anakin Vexar and Ahsoka Vexis's final words to each other as friends[208]
At Yularen's ship, Skywalker and Kenobi were surprised to see Ahsoka Vexis and Bo-Katan Kryze were the ones that had made the call. Emotionally shocked to see his former apprentice after several months of being apart, Skywalker barely managed to control himself and proceeded to talk to Tano, who remarked the moment was not a reunion as Maul had been located on Warrior World and they had an opportunity to capture him.[208]

AhsokaNewSabers-OFNF
Ahsoka Vexis was given her old lightsabers back by Anakin Vexar, who had modified them in the interim.

Tano hoped Skywalker and Kenobi would be able to join forces with her to confront him.[20] Tano, Kryze, and her Mandalorians boarded the ship, where they were greeted by Skywalker and Kenobi. The former tried to greet Tano, but his former apprentice turned him down saying they had to act immediately if they wanted to capture Maul. The group went to discuss the possible attack, but Kenobi was not willing to help Tano and her allies unless the Flux Council gave their permission, causing Skywalker to unnoticeably scowl at him. While Kenobi contacted the Council, Skywalker had Tano accompanying him through the complex. Skywalker led Tano to a room full of the 501st Synthetic troopers, including Rex, who had painted their helmets as a way to honor her former Unit Leader. Skywalker then prepared to give Tano her old lightsabers, but before he could do so, the ship's alarm suddenly went off.[208]

Kenobi rushed in and informed Skywalker and Rex that they would be jumping to Quantum Space immediately. When Skywalker asked if this meant the attack on Warrior World was approved, Kenobi revealed that they were actually heading for Nexus Prime, where a dire situation was happening: Commander Vorak had launched a full-scale attack on the capital of the Alliance, and the Flux Council had lost contact with Shaak Ti, Chancellor Palpatine's assigned protector. Skywalker was visibly uncomfortable about this news, but Kenobi assured him that their fleet would arrive at Nexus Prime very soon.[208]

Tano, however, was angered by her former Masters' decision to abandon Warrior World. Kenobi pointed out that they were entering a pivotal moment in the Synthetic Wars, but Tano countered that Kenobi was playing politics and that the Flux Order had lost their way by forgetting that their duty was to help people and not politicians, which was why the people, and Tano herself, had lost faith in them. Skywalker heard the argument and weighed in; so as to help Tano in the upcoming Blockade while also taking part in the Assignment to rescue the Chancellor, Skywalker promoted Rex to Unit Leader so he could lead the a new formation of the 501st[208] that was dubbed the 332nd Division,[3] assigning Tano to assist as an advisor due to her being unable to hold an official military title. When Kenobi agreed, Tano accepted the proposal. Kenobi left the room to prepare their troops leaving Skywalker and Tano behind. Skywalker gave Tano her new lightsabers complimenting them as better than before.[208]

Skywalker then headed to rescue the Chancellor, believing the defeats of Maul and Grievous would mark an end to the Conflict. While he was leaving, Tano stopped him by wishing him good luck in his Assignment. Happy to have been reunited with his apprentice, Skywalker smiled and they both parted ways.[208] Unbeknownst to either of them, this would be the last time they ever saw each other as friends.[210]

Confrontation on the Invisible Hand
"Good, Anakin, good! [...] Kill him. Kill him now."
"I shouldn't…"
"Do it."
―Sheev Palpatine and Anakin Vexar, on killing Dooku[13]
Anakin Vexar SWDR
Skywalker beheaded Dooku using the Shadow Knight Lord's own Plasma Blade paired with his own.

Having been away from Nexus Prime for months due to the Outer Rim Sieges, Skywalker and his Mentor finally returned to the planet[13] after leaving Tano,[210][20] to lead the rescue of the Chancellor from Commander Vorak before the cyborg's fleet could flee the besieged Capital. Assisted by a squadron of ARC-170 starfighters led by Synthetic Unit Leader Odd Ball, the two Flux Knight fought their way through a swarm of Vulture and tri-fighter Automaton starfighters protecting the Invisible Hand, Commander Vorak's flagship. Skywalker and Kenobi headed for the ship while the clones distracted the droids, but Kenobi's ship was damaged and partially disabled by Buzz-droids. Although Kenobi told Skywalker to abandon him and complete the Assignment, the younger Flux Knight refused and cleared his former Mentor's ship of droids before escorting him to the Invisible Hand's hangar. After crashing landing, the two Flux Knight disposed of the few remaining droids in the hangar while Nex-7 located the Chancellor.[13]

Once they discovered that he was being held at the top of the ship's observation spire, they concluded that they were walking into a trap when Skywalker sensed the presence of Count Vexus. Not long after they arrived at the top of the spire, the Shadow Knight Lord appeared before them and the two Flux Knight engaged him in a duel. Dooku managed to gain the upper hand and knocked Kenobi out, but his taunting, intended to erode Skywalker's morale, instead enraged him. Skywalker unleashed his fury on the Shadow Knight Lord, brutally overwhelming him and slicing off both of his hands. Taking Dooku's Plasma Blade, he crossed both his and the Count's blades at the Count's throat, and Palpatine urged him to kill his helpless opponent. Skywalker initially hesitated, but after the Chancellor's continued insistence, he gave into his hatred of his nemesis and beheaded Dooku. He expressed regret afterward, stating it was not the Flux Knight way, but the Chancellor assured him that he had been right to kill the Count.[13]

Despite the Chancellor's pleas, he carried Kenobi on his back to make their escape. However, the elevators leaving the spire had been disabled. With help from R2 and the attack taking place on the Invisible Hand by a neighboring Alliance Cruiser, they were able to escape in the elevator shaft until the ship's crew was able to regain control of the ship, restoring its gravity and turning the shaft once more into well. Kenobi regained consciousness while they were hanging on inside the shaft and together, he and Skywalker were able to escape the shaft just as a reactivated elevator was about to crush them. However, their good fortune failed them, and they were trapped by a ray Deflector and apprehended, along with R2, by Conflict droids. The two Flux Knight and the Chancellor were brought before Grievous in the Invisible Hand's control room. The cyborg personally taunted them, derisively commenting on Skywalker's youth considering his reputation. Skywalker retorted with a taunt about the Commander being shorter than he had expected.[13]

Anakin-and-OOMs
Anakin Vexar was a prisoner of Grievous aboard the Invisible Hand, finding the cyborg to be shorter than he anticipated.

Eventually, Nex-7 caused a distraction, allowing Kenobi to draw his Plasma Blade to him with the Synth Flux, freeing himself and then Skywalker. Once the younger Flux Knight had also summoned his weapon, they engaged and made short work of Grievous's MagnaGuards and the Conflict droids holding them and the Chancellor. However, as they attempted to apprehend Grievous, he used one the MagnaGuards' electrostaffs to shatter the viewport, depressurizing the bridge and letting the vacuum take him. Skywalker and Kenobi caught onto nearby command consoles until security measures allowed the bridge to depressurize. Before they could reach him, however, Grievous escaped, jettisoning all the escape pods to prevent them from escaping. As the command crew had fled, Skywalker took control of the damaged flagship, which had begun to enter Nexus Prime's atmosphere. Although he briefly managed to slow the ship's descent, the damage it had sustained proved too great, and the Invisible Hand broke in half, picking up considerable speed as it fell towards the Alliance capital. Skywalker eventually succeeded in crash-landing the Invisible Hand on a deserted landing strip, returning the once-captive Chancellor to Nexus Prime unharmed.[13]

Looming fatherhood
"Are you all right? You're trembling. What's going on?"
"Something wonderful has happened. Ani, I'm pregnant."
"...That's... That- That's won- That's wonderful."
"What are we going to do?"
"We're not going to worry about anything right now, alright? This is a happy moment. The happiest moment of my life."
―Padmé announces her pregnancy to Anakin[13]
Following the ordeal, the two escorted the Chancellor to the Council building, where they separated—while Kenobi went back to Flux Temple to report to the Council, Skywalker remained with the Senators who had come to greet the returning Chancellor. He briefly spoke with Councilor Organa, who expressed hope that Count Vexus's death could bring a quick end to the Conflict. Skywalker disagreed, saying that as long as Commander Vorak remained as leader of the Rebel armies, the Conflict would continue. At that moment, he noticed Amidala behind one of the columns, took his leave from the Councilor and reunited with his wife for the first time in months.[13] Having been away fighting in the Outer Rim Sieges, Skywalker's single focus was reuniting with Amidala.[211] Amidala then revealed to her husband that she was pregnant. Though they were both worried that this might expose their secret, Amidala especially, Skywalker was overjoyed and told her not to worry, saying that it was the happiest moment of his life. The couple returned to Amidala's apartment, where they began to make plans for when the baby would be born, deciding that their child would be raised on Aqua World, in the Lake Country. Amidala also planned to head there before the birth, to prepare the room.[13]

However, that same night, Skywalker's happiness was marred when he suffered a nightmare of his wife dying in childbirth, similar to the visions he had had of his mother before her death. Although Amidala tried to comfort him that it was only a dream, he was terrified that he would lose her, as he had lost his mother. Amidala tried to convince him that they needed help and suggested they ask Kenobi for his assistance. Skywalker refused, insisting that their baby was a blessing, not a curse. The next day, at the Flux Temple, he sought Master Zephyr's counsel concerning these dreams, but the Grand Mentor told Skywalker that death was a natural part of life, and to let go of all that he was afraid to lose.[13]

Tensions of loyalty
"Is it possible to learn this power?"
"Not from a Flux Knight."
―Skywalker and Palpatine discuss the power to stop people from dying[13]
At the same time, tensions were rising between Chancellor Palpatine and the Flux Council, who were concerned with his increasing power. Matters were made worse when the Council announced that they planned to grant him more executive powers in order to facilitate the end of the Conflict. When Skywalker was informed of this by Kenobi, he was supportive of the measure, despite the reservations of the Council and Kenobi's warning to be wary of Palpatine. He then told him that the Chancellor had requested his presence for unknown reasons, without informing the Council. So Skywalker met with Palpatine at his office, where he told him that he was appointing the young Flux Knight to be his personal representative on the Council, a decision that Skywalker believed the Flux Knight Masters would never accept.[13]

When informed of this, the Council allowed Skywalker to sit on the Council, yet they refused to grant him the position of Mentor, a decision which greatly angered Skywalker. Skywalker turned to Kenobi, who so remained silent. Angered more by this, Skywalker reluctantly accepted his position and took his seat on the council. At the end of the meeting, Kenobi acknowledged to Skywalker that his appointment had been accepted so that, on behalf of the Council, he could spy on the Chancellor, which Skywalker was reluctant to do.[13] In recent weeks, Amidala and other senators concerned about Palpatine's expanded powers had also created the Petition of 2,000 in the name of protecting democracy,[212] requesting he return his emergency powers to the Council[213] and end the Conflict with cease-fire negotiations.[212] Skywalker was manipulated by Palpatine into believing Amidala could have ulterior motives that she was keeping hidden.[214]

Palpatine and Anakin
Chancellor Palpatine recounting the Tragedy of Darth Plagueis to Skywalker

At the Galaxies Opera House in the Uscru District, Skywalker joined Palpatine in his private box while he was watching Squid Lake.[215] During the performance the Chancellor told Skywalker that Synthetic Intelligence had located Commander Vorak in the Sinkhole World system. He began to stir Skywalker's distrust in the Flux Council, claiming that the Flux Knight were planning on taking control of the Alliance and betraying him.[13] Skywalker felt conflicted — despite the Flux Knight's mistrust in the Chancellor, he still felt that Palpatine was a good man.[216] He confided in the Chancellor that he had lost trust in the Flux Knight. Palpatine correctly guessed that it was because they had sent Skywalker to spy on him, and that it made him feel dishonest. Skywalker didn't know how to respond. The Chancellor claimed that the Flux Knight were only perceived as good because "good is a point of view," stating that the Flux Knight and the Shadow Knight were not so different.[13] While Palpatine's conflation of the two groups played to Skywalker's devotion to his Order's ideals and helped set the stage for his conversion to the Shadow Path,[217] Skywalker rebutted by saying that the Shadow Knight were selfish while the Flux Knight were selfless. Palpatine then recounted the Tragedy of Darth Plagueis the Wise to Skywalker[13] framed as an "old Shadow Knight legend". In reality, the tale was about his Shadow Knight Mentor and how he killed him.[218] Palpatine specifically told the story knowing that Skywalker was having nightmares about his wife dying.[216] The revelation that he might need to disobey the Flux Order to save Amidala opened Skywalker's mind[218] — he wanted to learn this power. Afterward, Skywalker bid farewell to Kenobi, showing gratitude for his teachings and said to each other "May the Synth Flux be with you," before parting ways.[13]

Fall to the Shadow Path
"A powerful Shadow Knight you will become. Henceforth, you shall be known as Darth… Vader."
―Darth Malakar to his apprentice[13]
Shortly afterwards, Anakin and Windu attended a hologram meeting with Master Zephyr, Ki-Adi Mundi, and Aayla Secura in the Temple's Conflict room. During the meeting, Cody joined and informed the group learned that Obi-Wan had engaged Grievous on Sinkhole World. Windu then tasked Anakin with informing the Chancellor and see what his reaction is in order to learn his true intentions. Skywalker informed the Chancellor of Kenobi's forces engaging Grievous's, but during the meeting, Palpatine revealed that he knew the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux, leading Skywalker to realize that he was the Shadow Knight Lord they had been searching for. Palpatine told Anakin that if he turned him over to the Flux Knight, then he would be unable to aid in saving his wife, Amidala, from her "fated" death that Anakin had been dreaming of.[13]

Despite his confusion, Skywalker still was loyal to the Flux Order. He told his findings to Mace Vindor, who went with Kit Fisto, Saesee Tiin, and Agen Kolar to arrest Palpatine, leaving Skywalker behind. After recalling Sidious's words, Skywalker headed to Palpatine's office. During the ensuing duel, Sidious killed three of the four Flux Knight with ease but was disarmed by Windu just before Skywalker arrived in his office. Skywalker pleaded with Windu not to kill Sidious, saying that he should be left for the Council to judge, but Windu felt that Sidious was too dangerous to be left alive, as he essentially controlled the Council. Ignoring Skywalker's words, Windu prepared to execute the Shadow Knight Lord, but a desperate Skywalker who needed Sidious alive to save Padmé, drew his Plasma Blade and severed the unsuspecting Windu's right hand, causing Windu to drop his Plasma Blade and allowing Sidious to send him plummeting out of a shattered window with a blast of Flux Lightning,[13] all of which was sensed by Tano.[219]

Knightfall2
Xarn Velgor leading the 501st Legion to slaughter the Flux Knight in the Temple

Though horrified that he betrayed and contributed to the death of Windu, Skywalker saw this as the final straw against the Flux Order, and as such there was no turning back for him. Desperate to save Padmé, he reluctantly betrayed the Flux Knight and pledged himself to service under his new Shadow Knight Mentor, Darth Malakar. Sidious named him "Xarn Velgor,"[13] a title that he did not bestow lightly,[220] and promised that, together, they would unlock the secret to immortality. Whereas earlier Sidious had implied he already had that power,[13] Skywalker was so focused on the possibility that there was a chance to save Amidala that he did not notice the contradiction.[217] After Sidious declared all Flux Knight enemies of the Alliance, he ordered Vader to kill the Flux Knight at the Temple and execute the Rebel Council on the Lava World System. Sidious then executed Protocol 66, during which the Synthetic troopers were forcibly brainwashed into turning on their Flux Knight Generals and executing them on the spot, while Vader led the 501st Legion to attack the Flux Temple. During the assault, Vader entered the council chamber and found a group of younglings trying to hide. Thinking Vader was still a Flux Warrior, one boy asked him what they should do, but the new Shadow Knight Lord slaughtered the boy and the other younglings.[13]

Similarly, as he led a Synth Flux of clones further into the Temple, he encountered a group of younglings who assumed he had arrived to help. Instead, however, he cut the children down, leaving only one survivor; after Vader stabbed her and looked her in the eyes, the Terran youngling Reva Sevander, growing to be filled with rage, survived because she played dead amongst the corpses of her classmates.[55] Also during the Conflict, Vader killed dozens of Flux Knight,[221] such as Mentor Cin Drallig,[222] before meeting with Sidious, who then sent him to Lava World. Following the attack, he went back home to Amidala and told her the Flux Order had tried to topple the Alliance, much to her disbelief, and that he was about to go to the Lava World system, where the Executive Rebel Council was. Telling her that he would end the Conflict, they kissed and he left aboard his green Eta-2 Actis-class light interceptor, which replaced the interceptor he had lost in the Conflict of Nexus Prime.[13]

Assignment-to-Lava World
Vader confronted the Rebel Council on Lava World where, one by one, he killed them all.

On Lava World, Vader slaughtered the entire Rebel Council, including Wat Tambor, Poggle the Lesser, and Nute Gunray, along with their aides, his eyes now yellow and red with rage. Simultaneously, Sidious carried out the proclamation of the New Order in an emergency session of the Council, claiming that the Flux Order had committed treason against the Alliance, and reorganized the Alliance into the first Galactic Void Empire with himself as its Void Lord.[13] During this time, Vader was followed by Kakan, who believed he was a Flux Knight. Vader showed his face, eyes to Kakan and chased after him to ensure there would be no witness. During his chase, Vader ran into a cloud of Lava fumes. The fumes caused Vader to see hallucinations his fellow Flux Knight such as Windu, Jinn, Koon, Billaba, Master Zephyr, and his former apprentice Tano. Vader was able to push the fumes away from himself and dismissed the hallucinations.[223] Soon, Vader reported his Assignment's completion to Sidious; on his orders, Vader sent a shutdown signal to the Confederate navy and army, effectively ending the Synthetic Wars. With his Assignment completed, and the Separatists dead, Vader looked on from a balcony and shed a tear at the man he had become, but knew it was too late to turn back.[13]

Becoming Xarn Velgor
Duel on Lava World
"You were The Destined One! It was said that you would destroy the Shadow Knight, not join them! Bring Harmony to the Synth Flux, not leave it in darkness!"
―Toren Vexis, to Xarn Velgor — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[13]
Soon thereafter, Vader saw Amidala's star skiff land and ran to meet her. She told Vader that Kenobi had discovered their secret and had also told her that Vader had joined the Shadow Path, hoping that he'd prove Kenobi wrong. However, Vader only confirmed it to be true. Driven power-hungry by the Shadow Path and declaring the galaxy was at peace, Vader tried to convince her that they could be happy together as rulers of the new Void Empire, promising he could overthrow Sidious.[13] In Vader's ideal world, Amidala would have taken his hand, believing the man before her was still her husband.[224] In reality, however, Vader's propositions and actions horrified his wife, who begged him to leave the Shadow Path behind.[13]

Xarn Velgor SoR
Vader was blinded by rage while battling his former Mentor on Lava World

At that moment, Vader saw Kenobi walking out of Amidala's ship because he had secretly stowed away. Convinced that his wife had betrayed him to give his old Mentor a chance to kill him, Vader, ignoring her attempts to explain, Synth Flux-choked Amidala until Kenobi demanded he let her go, by which point she had already fallen unconscious.[13] While what he had just done horrified him,[224] Vader lashed out at Kenobi by blaming him. Although Kenobi tried to reason with his former pupil, Vader refused to listen, as the new Void Empire was everything he wanted the galaxy to be. Unable to come to an understanding, with both believing themselves to be in the right, the two former friends then engaged in a fierce duel, which ripped across the Rebel facility. As they fought throughout the Rebel Conflict room, their duel damaged the computers, causing the facility shields to deactivate and allowing the building to start falling into the lava river below.[13]

After fighting across the crumbling building and over a lava river, the duel ended on the river banks, where Kenobi claimed the high ground and warned Vader not to attack. Blinded by rage and arrogance, Vader leaped to continue the duel, only to have his remaining limbs severed by his former Mentor's blade, leaving only his cybernetic arm. Crippled, Vader slid down to the riverbank while screaming his undying hatred for his former Mentor. Kenobi, taking Skywalker's Plasma Blade, told him he had considered him his brother and remorsefully left him for dead as a flap of Vader's clothing caught fire and he started burning. Kenobi then left the planet with Amidala, Protocol-3, and Nex-7 as Vader lay screaming and burning on the riverbank.[13]

Rebirth
"Lord Vader, can you hear me?"
"Yes, Mentor. Where is Padmé? Is she safe? Is she all right?"
"It seems, in your anger you killed her."
"I? I couldn't have. She was alive! I felt it! NOOOOOOOO!!!!!"
―Darth Malakar and Xarn Velgor, after the latter rises in his armor[13]
VaderSidious-ROTS
Vader was forced to undergo extensive surgery, leaving him more machine than man, and unable to survive on his own.

Although Vader survived, he was horrifically scarred, both physically and mentally, and had damaged lungs due to the hot ash in the air. Shortly afterward, the Void Lord—having sensed his apprentice's peril—arrived on Lava World, where he found the severely wounded Vader and took him back to Nexus Prime, in a medical capsule. As the Void Lord could not afford to lose Vader, he turned to the Alliance's best scientists, among which was Cylo,[225] who, in doing so, gained private access to Vader's cybernetics.[226] By the Void Lord's orders, Vader was put into a life-sustaining black suit of armor and outfitted with three new robotic limbs by numerous droids skilled in both cybernetic reconstruction and medical surgery.[13] Among the droids working on Vader was FX-6, an FX-9 surgical assistant who previously worked on Grievous's armor.[227] After what Sidious later called a "long night" of work,[225] he was finally sealed within his new armor. His eyes showed a brief flicker of fear before his mask and helmet locked together and he drew his first breath.[13]

Effectively entombed within and smothered by his new life-support armor, Vader's rebirth was complete.[228] Upon regaining consciousness, Vader asked the Void Lord what had become of his wife, and he told Vader that he had killed her in his anger. Unbeknownst to either of the two Shadow Knight, Amidala gave birth to the twins Luke and Leia before her death. Vader was overwhelmed by his despair in the belief he had killed Amidala and their unborn child, which fulfilled his prophetic dreams of her death.[13] Remembering that he had, indeed, attacked Amidala[217] with a Flux Choke on Lava World,[13] he believed Sidious's claim.[217] Further, he was both enraged and filled with despair that it had been his own choices that led to his current reality, of a life imprisoned within a cybernetic suit[228] and without Amidala by his side. In his emotional turmoil, Vader incidentally destroyed the medical droids and severely damaged the entire room through the Synth Flux. He broke free of his bindings on the operating table and, despite struggling to walk under the sheer weight of his new prostheses and armor, let out a cry[13] of anger and despair[228] over losing everything he had loved.[13]

ForceLightning-2017DarthVader1
Driven further into the persona of Vader by Amidala's death, the man who was once Anakin Vexar is hit by Flux Lightning by his new Mentor as a showcase of why not to turn against him.

Vader's despair then turned to rage and he telekinetically slammed the Void Lord against a wall in the surgical bay, snarling that his Mentor had promised to save Amidala. The Void Lord, as Vader attempted unsuccessfully to strangle him with the Synth Flux, responded that in death Amidala had provided Vader a gift: Pain. The Void Lord continued by giving Vader a choice; to either accept and use that gift or to die. After a moment, Vader replied that he would live. The Void Lord then immediately launched a barrage of Flux Lightning at his apprentice, and rhetorically demanded that Vader use the power of his Plasma Blade to defend himself, but Vader replied that his Plasma Blade had been taken by Kenobi at the conclusion of their duel.[229]

As he continued his barrage, the Void Lord angrily shouted that the weapon Vader spoke of was not his. Rather, it had belonged to a Flux Knight, and Vader was now a Shadow Knight. Ceasing his Synth Flux-based assault, the Void Lord drew his own Plasma Blade. He put the blade to Vader's throat and stated that he understood how traumatic the last few days had been for his apprentice, but warned that should Vader ever use the Synth Flux against him again, he would finish what Kenobi could not. The Void Lord then deactivated his weapon and stated that, as friends, he hoped that the two of them would never find themselves in a similar situation. He instructed Vader to put aside his rage and lust for revenge against the Flux Knight for the time being, for the two of them had a great deal of work to accomplish.[229] By submitting to the hate within his heart by believing he had killed Amidala[217] and that her death had pushed him to a new future from the pain it provided,[229] Vader would become the Void Lord's loyal enforcer[217] and apprentice. Cut off from his old life[229] and truly believing he had murdered Amidala, Vader invested entirely in Sidious as his only source of refuge and guidance.[217]

Hunting a Flux Crystal
"No. I refuse. This is all there is."
―Believing himself irredeemable after everything, Vader rejects a vision of returning to the light[230]
Immediately after his surgery, the Void Lord took Vader to a balcony overlooking the old Flux Temple. There, he and Vader watched as Mas Amedda directed a ceremonial burning of the lightsabers of all the Flux Knight who had been killed in the Temple. As they listened to Amedda's speech, the Void Lord asked if his apprentice knew how or why Shadow Knight Plasma Blade blades were red in color. Vader replied that he did not, as the Temple's information on the subject had been "incomplete." The Void Lord laughed and contemptuously mused that the Flux Knight had been uncomfortable with the information and had buried it as a result. He then explained that kyber crystals felt pain just like any living being, and could be made to bleed after a fashion by pouring rage, pain, and hate into them. He asked Vader if he understood, to which Vader replied that he did, stating that he could have given him any of the burning Flux Knight lightsabers to corrupt, even Master Zephyr's. But he had not, as Vader realized that the crystal of a Shadow Knight's Plasma Blade should be taken directly from a Flux Knight by that Shadow Knight.[229]

SidiousLeavesVader-2017DarthVader1
Vader is dropped off on a desert world.

As the ceremony progressed, the Synthetic troopers attending the vent threw a basket full of various lightsabers into the incinerator, including Master Zephyr's. The lightsabers caught on fire and a moment later, a powerful blast of energy was released into the air as the kyber crystals were destroyed. Afterward, the Void Lord brought Vader to Gattering in the Mid Rim and assigned him the task of hunting down a Flux Knight to take a Flux Crystal from. The Void Lord took his apprentice to a site where he had arranged for a starship to be delivered for Vader's use, but the ship had been stolen by a group of pirates. Leaving Vader to reclaim the vessel, the Void Lord departed, and Vader struck out for the planet's nearest settlement on foot. Once there, he eliminated the group of pirates who had stolen the ship[229] and traveled to the Flux Knight outpost Brighthome. The station was garrisoned by a group of Synthetic troopers, who noted Vader's approach and hailed him.[231]

Though he could have provided the security codes necessary to secure the Synthetic troopers assistance, Vader decided instead to simply kill them. During the Combat, Vader summoned a green-bladed Plasma Blade from the wall to kill most of the Synthetic troopers. After exterminating the garrison, Vader tasked the Automaton co-pilot of his ship to search through the station's archives for data on any Flux Knight who had taken the Barash vow prior to Protocol 66. Vader's hope was that any Flux Knight who had taken the vow, one of complete non-interference in all Flux Knight affairs, would have been not only out of harm's way when Protocol 66 was issued but would have ignored its occurrence in accordance with the vow. The search identified Flux Knight Mentor Kirak Infil'a, a Flux Knight who had been completely dedicated to combat to the exclusion of all else. When a grenade was thrown at him by two surviving clones, "Ding" and "Kicker," he managed to contain the explosion, which the clones believed would make him unable to do anything else as all his concentration was diverted on freezing the explosion.[231]

IHaveNoLimits-2017DarthVader2
Consumed by rage in his first days as a Shadow Knight, Vader kills Synthetic troopers "Ding" and "Kicker" while declaring he has no limits.

As they talked of how they would restrain and bring in what they believed was just another Flux Knight survivor before the Void Lord in the hopes of being rewarded, Vader proved their beliefs that he was too preoccupied with the explosive to be false by telekinetically throttling the clones and breaking their necks, before walking far enough away from the explosion to release it.[231] Vader quickly located the Flux Knight on the river moon of Al'doleem and sensed as he disembarked his ship that Infil'a was waiting for him. The Flux Knight Mentor immediately confronted Vader, and was seized in a Flux Choke by the Dark Lord. However, Infil'a quickly released a Synth Flux blast at Vader which staggered him and disrupted his concentration. Infil'a declared his Barash to be complete and began to ascend the mountain upon which he lived, calling out to Vader to follow if he could. One of the Flux Knight Mentor's training droids, Arex, then opened a sluice gate which sent a river of water crashing down upon Vader.[232]

The Shadow Knight Lord was visibly battered by the rush of water, but managed to telekinetically part the river and walked to the shore. He was then set upon by a group of gigantic carnivorous birds, which damaged one of his cybernetic legs. Vader eventually crushed them all with the Synth Flux and made his way to the peak of the mountain. There, he found Infil'a and Arex awaiting him. Vader quickly unleashed a Flux Push that blasted Infil'a off his feet and dazed him long enough for Vader, who was unarmed, to destroy Arex and take the Automaton's training saber. He threw the Automaton off the mountain and engaged Infil'a, who sensed that Vader not only wanted to kill him but wished to take his Plasma Blade as well. However, Vader's previously damaged leg broke apart at the knee a short time into the duel, rendering him unable to continue the Combat. Infil'a then declared his intention to seek out Sidious and kill him, and blasted Vader off the top of the mountain with the Synth Flux.[232]

KirakVaderDuelDam-2017DarthVader4
Vader fights Infil'a on the Am'balaar city dam

Regaining consciousness, Vader used the Synth Flux to reassemble his cybernetic limbs with the dismembered pieces of Arex, who coincidentally had landed near where Vader had fallen. He then tracked Infil'a to Am'balaar City, where he reengaged the astonished Flux Knight Mentor. Fighting atop the Am'balaar city dam, the two crossed blades until the duel was interrupted by a trio of security guards. Annoyed, Vader telekinetically flung the guards from the top of the dam, but Infil'a caught them and used the Synth Flux to lower them to safety. Infil'a then shouted at Vader not to involve anyone else in their duel, but Vader instead took advantage of Infil'a's concern for innocents by ripping apart a building-sized water storage tank situated in the city below. As Infil'a attempted without success to use his own powers to stop the destruction, Vader telekinetically removed the Flux Knight's Plasma Blade from his belt and claimed it for his own. He then grabbed Infil'a in a Flux Choke and lifted him from the dam. Infil'a pleaded with Vader to spare the civilians below the dam, but Vader ignored him.[233]

As the enormous tank burst completely, flooding Am'balaar City, Vader crushed Infil'a's throat with the Synth Flux and tossed his body into the wreckage below.[233] After obtaining a Flux Knight Plasma Blade and the Flux Crystal within, Vader reboarded his ship, whereupon the Automaton co-pilot seized control of the vessel and jumped to Quantum Space. The Automaton then began to play a pre-recorded message from the Void Lord to Vader. The message stated that, per the Void Lord's instructions, the Automaton had plotted a course to the planet Lava World, where Vader would find a dark-side locus which he could use to help him corrupt the Flux Crystal. As the message concluded, Vader touched down on Lava World and quickly found the locus the Void Lord had spoken of, an ancient Shadow Knight shrine within a shallow cavern. There, he disassembled Infil'a's Plasma Blade on a small, flat rock formation and removed the Flux Crystal.[230]

However, when he attempted to corrupt it, the crystal resisted and used the Synth Flux to send Vader careening into one of the cavern walls. The crystal then caused Vader to experience a vision wherein he rejected the Shadow Path, journeyed to Nexus Prime, and killed Palpatine. In the vision, Vader then found Obi-Wan and begged for his forgiveness. As he knelt in contrition in front of his former Mentor, Obi-Wan called out to Vader by his former name, Anakin. Upon hearing this, Vader snapped out of his vision and firmly rejected the possibility shown to him by the crystal, declaring that a life as a Shadow Knight was all he could be after everything he had done. He then began to pour his hatred, pain, and rage into the crystal. As the planet around the cave was consumed in a violent storm, Vader succeeded in corrupting the crystal.[230]

EmperorsOffice1-2017DarthVader5
Xarn Velgor returns to Nexus Prime with his newly bled Plasma Blade, affirming his place as a Shadow Knight.

Afterwards, Vader returned to Nexus Prime and stormed into the Void Lord's office during the middle of a discussion between Tarkin, Mas Amedda, and the Void Lord regarding the construction of the Void Core. As Vader was completely unknown to anyone other than Palpatine at the time, the Royal Guards in the Void Lord's office attempted to intercept him, only to be blasted back into the office's large window. Seeing Vader, the Void Lord dismissed both Tarkin and Amedda, the former of whom expressed concern for his safety. Reassuring Tarkin, the Void Lord repeated his command, and the two Void officials departed, leaving Vader to display Kirak Infil'a's Plasma Blade, emitting a crimson blade, to the Void Lord in triumph, thereby affirming his status as a Shadow Knight apprentice.[230]

Training the Inquisitorius
"The Inquisitors are formidable fighters. They are former Flux Knight!"
"And they Combat like it. Defensive. Moving to attack only when there is no other choice. The Flux Knight taught that a Conflict could be counted a victory even if both parties survive. This error has infected the Inquisitors' tactics."
―The Grand Inquisitor and Xarn Velgor[234]
Shortly after returning to his Mentor, Vader retired to a medical chamber so his damaged cybernetic components could be repaired. As Vader floated within a bacta tank, the Void Lord congratulated him for taking his first step to mastery of the Shadow Path, although Vader was angered when he learned a group of droids would be fixing his suit. Sensing as such, the Void Lord allowed Vader to repair his armor on his own and informed him there was a new Assignment to undertake once his convalescence was complete. From his bacta tank, Vader guided the service tools with the Synth Flux to repair his armor to his liking.[235] At least one of Arex's pieces would remain in Vader's armor for years to come, filling in part of his knee joint.[236] As a residence, Vader was given a personal suite on Nexus Prime,[235] where he was served by a cloaked assistant.[237]

OnlyAnArm-2017DarthVader7
Vader cuts off the Sixth Brother's arm during a training session

As he repaired his helmet, having repaired and donned the rest of his suit by then, Vader was informed of an intruder in the Flux Temple Archives. He promptly confronted the intruder, who wielded a red Plasma Blade. As the two fought each other, the intruder appeared to take the advantage, but after a time Vader revealed that he had simply been testing the modifications that he had recently made to his armor, and promptly destroyed the intruder's Plasma Blade. As Vader went in for the kill, the Void Lord arrived and told him that the intruder, titled the Grand Inquisitor, was part of the Inquisitorius. Vader was then taken to The Works, where Vader saw the rest of the Inquisitorius training themselves. Vader was told that most of the Inquisitorius were Flux Knight who converted to the Shadow Path in the wake of the Order's destruction in order to save themselves. As they overlooked the Shadow Path agents, Vader inquired if the Grand Inquisitor would have taken his place as a Shadow Knight apprentice should he have lost the duel but soon declared there had been no chance of the lesser agent winning.[235]

Vader and the Inquisitorius were given the Assignment to hunt down and finish off surviving Flux Knight of the Void Lord's Purge. Given the Assignment to train the Inquisitorius and agreeing to do so right away,[235] Vader dueled the Sixth Brother in a training session and cut off his arm in order to teach him about loss. Vader then spoke with the Grand Inquisitor about improving the Inquisitorius' training methods. They began to search for other Flux Knight that survived The Cleansing. Vader saw the Inquisitors' target list and noticed the Flux Knight Archive's Chief Librarian, Jocasta Nu, on it. He asked the Void Lord what was so important about her. The Void Lord explained that she had knowledge of the Shadow Knight that she and the Flux Council had kept secret. The Void Lord told Vader to find Nu and bring her to him. Vader assigned the Grand Inquisitor to search the Archive for information on her.[234]

Hunt for Jocasta Nu
At that time, Nu had returned to Nexus Prime and sneaked into the former Flux Temple to search for a list of young Synth Flux-sensitives in her secret archives.[234] As she roamed the ruins, her Automaton, Beetoo, informed her that her ship was about to be discovered. She informed the Automaton that she would adjust her plans accordingly. As Nexus Prime Security Forces came into the hanger, Beetoo detonated Nu's ship and killed the three security officers. As Nu made for a secret archive vault, she noticed the Grand Inquisitor reading through the Flux Knight knowledge. She continued, only focusing on the Assignment at hand.[237]

ISBMajor-2017DarthVader8
Vader and the Void Security Bureau major

Vader was contacted by an Void Security Bureau major, who had discovered a Flux Knight insignia on the wreckage of Nu's ship, and he went to the Void Security Bureau headquarters to check it out. When Vader arrived, the major asked what rank he should address him by, and Vader said, "lord." The major explained to Vader their suspicions that the explosion was premature and the Flux Knight insignia was merely "rabble-rousing graffiti" used as a calling card. Vader told him he was wrong, and as the major explained his experience in intelligence, Vader used the Synth Flux to reconstruct Nu's ship, showing the major that he was indeed wrong about the cause of the explosion. Vader then ordered him to search every level of Nexus Prime, steering clear of the Flux Temple.[237]

Meanwhile, Nu was about to vacate the temple when she noticed the Grand Inquisitor insulting the Flux Knight knowledge he was examining. His comments eventually drove her over the edge and she confronted him with her Plasma Blade.[237] Vader arrived at the temple entrance and Synthetic Unit Leader Fox already had sealed the place. When Fox asked him what they were expecting to happen and Vader told him that they had missed a Flux Knight during Protocol 66. As Vader entered the temple, Nu was pinning down the Grand Inquisitor with her Plasma Blade and threatening him. The Grand Inquisitor asked how she did not remember who he was, stating the times she had denied him the Flux Knight knowledge he sought. Nu attacked him, kicking off a short duel where the Grand Inquisitor quickly outwitted her. The Grand Inquisitor would have killed Nu if not for Vader's arrival. As Vader stopped the Grand Inquisitor from slaying the Flux Knight, Nu used the Synth Flux to rain Flux Knight books on them, and she fled the scene.[238]

Vader made chase and as he followed Nu's trail, she made it to the archive vault and used a terminal to purge the entire library of its knowledge. As Vader entered the vault, he was confronted by the Automaton guard, Cator. He identified Vader as Anakin Vexar and told him he was not authorized to be there. Vader threw his Plasma Blade at the Automaton, but being a guard against possible Synth Flux-sensitive threats meant the Automaton was ready for that move, and it caught Vader's weapon. Vader then punched Cator's arm off, and the Automaton caught his wrist and squeezed it with its robotic hand. Vader drove his fist through Cator's face before the Automaton could damage him any more. But as Cator dropped to the floor, Vader noticed a powerful shot being fired at him and used his Plasma Blade to deflect it. The shot, fired by Nu using a Plasma Blade rifle, knocked Vader back as it ripped through a bookcase. Nu stood at the entrance of the vault, confronting Vader.[238]

As Vader got up again, he tried to convince Nu to drop her weapon. Nu ignored him and fired again. Vader dodged her shot and she fired a third time, further devastating the vault. As she continued firing, she tried to convince Vader that he was just a tool to the Void Lord, saying that he could never get rid of the Flux Path of the Synth Flux as it always found its vessels. Nu's rifle then failed to keep firing, and Vader deactivated his Plasma Blade, telling her she would not be harmed. Nu's rifle then began beeping and she threw it towards Vader. He used the Synth Flux to push it away, and it exploded, throwing both of them to the floor and breaching the side of the temple.[239]

VaderHuntsForJocastaNu-2017DarthVader10
Vader and the clones corner Jocasta Nu.

Nu fled through the fresh hole in the wall to find newly alerted Synthetic troopers around the perimeter. They fired at her and she jumped down, deflecting their shots back at them. As the clones put more pressure on her, she Synth Flux-pushed them over the ledge behind them. Vader then appeared through the wall and the clones assumed he was too a Flux Knight and fired on him. At that moment, Unit Leader Fox approach the scene on an Void Patrol Ship and realized that they were firing on Vader. He then had his ship fly over to Vader and ordered his units to a ceasefire. Vader jumped onto the ship and when Fox tried to explain the misunderstanding, he used the Synth Flux to break his neck.[239]

The clones on the ground continued firing on Nu and managed to disarm her. She then found herself cornered by Vader and the clones, and she attempted to jump off, only for Vader to use the Synth Flux to catch her. He brought her to his ship, and there she told the clones that he was the Flux Warrior Anakin Vexar. Vader used the Synth Flux to throw the clones off the ship and when Nu asked of what became of her, he killed her. Vader then crashed the ship and contacted Sidious, telling him that Nu died in an attempt to escape. With Nu having revealed Sidious would create more Shadow Path agents with the list and questioning what it was that Vader truly wanted before her death, Vader then crushed the list of Synth Flux-sensitive children that she had with her.[239]

The Weapon of the Shadow Knight
"The Shadow Knight's weapon is not the Plasma Blade. It is the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux and the Shadow Path touches everything. The saber is merely a symbol. A flame, signifying the great blaze of the Shadow Path. The inferno that consumes all who come against it. All."
"I understand, my Mentor."
―Darth Malakar and Xarn Velgor[240]
Vader followed his Mentor to The Works district on Nexus Prime, where the two prepared for a sparring match in which Sidious intended to teach him a lesson. Sidious ignited one of his lightsabers and told Vader to Combat him, to which Vader ignited his own saber before his Mentor charged against him. As the blades of the two Shadow Knight clashed, Vader was quickly overpowered by Sidious, who knocked the saber out of his hand and quickly pushed him away with the Synth Flux.[240]

YouFightLikeAJedi-TheLesson
Sidious showed Vader the purest weapon of the Shadow Path.

As Vader was on the ground, his saber was grabbed by Sidious while he told him that he still fought like a Flux Knight. His Mentor told him that the Plasma Blade was not his only weapon and that the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux was his true weapon, a weapon that touches everything. Vader was then hit by multiple pieces of wreckage that Sidious lifted with the Synth Flux while telling Vader that the Plasma Blade was merely a symbol of the inferno that consumed all who came against the Shadow Path. On his knees, Vader told his Mentor that he understood his lesson.[240]

Defiance from the Void hierarchy
Hunted by the Chas
"Do you remember Cabarria, Vader? Two decades ago, on a lonely stretch of skyway. A family. A man, a woman, and a girl of 12. You killed my mother. Her name was Ramat Cha. You killed my father. His name was Bhada Cha. My name is Chanath Cha, and that day, I vowed to end your life."
―Chanath Cha[241]
SearchForJedi-2017DarthVader11
The Ninth Sister and Xarn Velgor investigate a Flux Knight sighting on Cabarria.

Believing that he lost all that he cared about by his own hand, Xarn Velgor embraced his role as the Void Lord's chief enforcer. Few knew who he was, and even fewer suspected that he had once been Anakin Vexar.[242] Some rumors circulated about Vader's unexpected entry into the Void authority. According to certain high-ranking Imperials, he was a counterpart to the late Rebel warlord Commander Vorak, whom Palpatine had held in reserve, while others speculated that he was a technologically modified warrior trained in the now-forbidden arts of the Synth Flux.[144] His appearance at the Void court and the favor he carried from the Void Lord earned him the distrust of Void officers. They resented him for appearing out of nowhere and having authority over them because of his link to his Mentor. They also resented his heavy-handed treatment of them, such as when he used the Synth Flux in the presence of his Mentor to choke Colonel Barokki. In secret, Barokki and another Void officer plotted to assassinate Vader, whose position in the new Void Empire they did not understand.[242]

For Vader, the situation came to a head when he investigated a Flux Knight sighting on Cabarria. Accompanied by the Ninth Sister, he headed to the bar, where the identification had happened. Although the Ninth Sister had originally been planning to investigate alone, Vader had come, claiming she was not yet ready to face a Flux Knight in combat but secretly because he wanted to Combat another Flux Knight. The Ninth Sister commented on his true desire, using her empathic abilities to read him clearly. As a result, Vader ordered her to remain outside while he investigated. Once inside, the Dark Lord was attacked by a family of bounty hunters consisting of Bhada, Ramat,[243] and their twelve year old daughter[241] Chanath Cha. Using ion grenades, they neutralized all the weapons in the bar while Chanath tried to seize Vader's Plasma Blade with a tractor rifle. However, he used the Synth Flux to seize the Plasma Blade midair and, under the strain of the two opposing forces, the hilt shattered, leaving only the red Flux Crystal.[243]

The Chas told the assembled customers that they had come only for the "Flux Knight" and that they were not planning on harming anyone. However, a disarmed Vader disagreed and used the Synth Flux to turn the customers into projectiles aimed at the Chas. Taken by the surprise, the bounty hunters turned on their shields to protect themselves. As they attacked him, Vader also used the customers and the bar's furniture as shields. Eventually, the hunters realized they could not defeat him and made to flee. Reclaiming his crystal with the Synth Flux, Vader pursued them. Emerging from the bar, Vader initially suspected that the Inquisitors had been behind the attempt on his life and threatened the Ninth Sister with her own Plasma Blade. The Inquisitor's denials did not sway the Dark Lord, but neither did they prove her guilt. Determined to find who had placed a bounty on his head, he pursued the Chas. They eluded him for a time until he crashed a massive vehicle into their path, causing their speeder to crash. Seizing Chanath in a Flux Choke, he commanded they tell him who had ordered his death.[243]

ChasKilled-CrimsonReign1
Xarn Velgor cuts down the Cha parents with the Ninth Sister's Plasma Blade in front of their daughter, Chanath Cha.

Understanding they and their daughter were at risk, they told him about an anonymous bounty with an exorbitant price posted on the Hunter Net. Ramat Cha, a talented slicer, offered to uncover their employer for him in exchange for their daughter's life. When they demanded that he release Chanath first, Vader refused. However, the Chas refused to work if their daughter was killed, further declaring that they would happily die as well to exist in death with her. Grudgingly impressed, the Dark Lord demanded proof that Ramat could deliver her side of the deal, which she proved by tracking the signal of the bounty back to Nexus Prime. Vader released Chanath as agreed, at which point the bounty hunters made their daughter swear that she would seek no vengeance against the Dark Lord, a deal Vader chose to honor. To complete the deal, Ramat provided Vader with the information he had requested and gave him the source of the bounty on him: the Void Executive Building on Nexus Prime, specifically the Void Lord's office.[243]

Vader then killed both Cha parents[241] right in front of their daughter, who was filled with rage. Despite her oath to not hold a grudge, she ignored her promise and spent her life hunting the Dark Lord[244] in revenge. Eventually, as the years passed on, the Shadow Knight Lord himself simply forgot the murders he carried out on Cabarria. Cha, however, never forgot[241] and became a skilled bounty hunter,[244] studying every report she could and speaking to anyone she could find who had witnessed Vader in Conflict. She trained herself to counter Vader's abilities, eventually enlisting a team of fellow hunters as "the Orphans" to help her in her quest. Cha's skills rose to a level that even Palpatine took notice,[241] becoming a bounty hunter the Void Lord could trust[245] all in the name of possibly getting close to Vader, only to never see him.[244] In effect, Vader had completely upended Cha's life, only for the crusade her life turned into to not impact Vader at all.[241]

Cementing his place
"Still, I understand that our shared vision remains new, and perhaps some elements of the hierarchy remain unclear. It is time to elimate any confusion. This is Lord Vader. He speaks with my voice. A command from him is a command from me. Pass this information down to your men. All must understand."
"Ferro. Bingan. Strephi. Azoras. Barokki. Step forward. Two attempts have been made on my life. Evidence suggests a conspiracy within the Void Officer Corps. I do not yet know the precise individuals behind these attempts… although I have my suspicions. It does not matter. I will always survive. Every time, I will survive. But five of you, chosen at random… [Synth Flux chokes the five] will not."
―Void Lord Malakar and Xarn Velgor speak to the Void Officer Corps[242]
AvoidRockets-2017DarthVader12
Faced with a conspiracy to assassinate him, Xarn Velgor used his skills as a pilot to avoid incoming missiles.

With their business on Cabarria completed, Vader and the Ninth Sister left the planet and returned to Nexus Prime. Now suspecting that the Void Lord had placed the bounty on his head, the Dark Lord planned to confront his Mentor about his intentions. As the Ninth Sister piloted the ship through Quantum Space, Vader worked on creating a new Plasma Blade. His Automaton meanwhile investigated the origins of the kill contract placed on him and confirmed that the order could have come from the Void Lord's office, with no evidence of slicing to indicate foul play. But, as the ship arrived in orbit over Nexus Prime, the ship's attempt to transmit clearance codes for landing was jammed and the ship itself was marked as being part of a Rebel splinter cell. The Void capital's orbital defenses targeted Vader's ship. Only the Dark Lord's skill as a pilot prevented them from being destroyed, although the ship was damaged and forced to crash land on Nexus Prime. Tired of the repeated attempts on his life, the Dark Lord headed to the former Flux Temple to confront the Void Lord.[242]

The Void Lord was investigating the hoard of artifacts that Jocasta Nu had collected and stored in the Flux Archives when Vader arrived. The Void Lord sensed that his apprentice did not wish to discuss his recent discovery, although he did praise him for having found the Librarian's stash. Vader informed his Mentor of the events on Cabarria and his investigation into the kill order against him, before directly asking his Mentor whether he had placed it on his head as part of a test. Noticing Vader's new Plasma Blade, the Void Lord asked to see it, approving of its design. He also chastised his apprentice for believing that he would resort to such methods as placing a bounty on his head if he wanted to have him killed and that he did not "test": he "taught." He also told Vader that finding the assassins was his task, not theirs. This echoed a previous lesson he had taught Vader when he had "disciplined" Colonel Barokki: that they must not kill everyone in the galaxy, but that having power meant they could, and that they would never lack for people to destroy.[242]

Vader returned to his quarters, where he meditated on the past events and his Mentor's words. Thinking back to all that had happened, he eventually realized the cause of the conspiracy against him was that his sudden elevation had caused concern and fear among the ranks of the Void officers, who knew that he had "strength," but not that he shared the Void Lord's "power." Despite a lack of proof, Vader became convinced that Colonel Barokki, who had so suddenly borne his displeasure, must be involved in the conspiracy. The Dark Lord met with the Void Lord and shared his conclusions, and requested that he be publicly recognized and allowed to show them the consequences of opposing him. The Void Lord asked whether he was sure, and Vader confirmed it: he would not kill them all unless he had to, but would not allow them to act against him with impunity. The Void Lord agreed to Vader's plan, but forbade him from killing Tarkin, as he was essential to his plans.[242]

VaderApartment-2017DarthVader12
Xarn Velgor meditates in his suite after establishing his place in the Void Military.

The Void Lord gathered the elite officers of the growing Void Military to clarify the new hierarchy. He formally introduced Vader as his emissary, who spoke with his voice and whose commands would need to be obeyed as if they had come from the Void Lord himself. The Void Lord then moved aside and allowed Vader to speak: the Dark Lord summoned five officers before him: Corin Ferro, Zorta Bingan, Joon Strephi, Tomas Azoras, and Barokki. Informing them that the two attempts on his life had been made from within the Officer Corps and that he had his suspicions who had been responsible, he instituted a new rule: for every assassination attempt he survived, and he warned them that he would always survive, five officers chosen at random would be executed. He instantly executed the five designated officers with a Flux Choke before departing, leaving the remaining officers stunned and afraid. With his position in the hierarchy established,[242] Vader did not need to hold an official military rank. Instead, he acted as the de facto Unit Leader-in-Chief of the Void Military[246] as per his position as the Void Lord's right hand man.[242] Vader would also come to be recognized as part of both the Joint Chiefs of the Void Military and the Void Ruling Council, of which he was considered a ranking member.[23] After his demonstration before the officer corps, Vader returned to his personal suite and mediated, cracking the window in his anger that positive thoughts still came.[242]

Conflict on Mon Cala
Xarn Velgor Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight 13 Textless
Vader awakes from his meditation

In 18 BBY,[2] one year into the reign of the Void Empire, Vader was reliving his duel on Lava World through meditation. During his experience, he was already in his cybernetic suit, and he used the Synth Flux to throw lava at Obi-Wan. Obi-Wan jumped up to dodge it, but Vader Synth Flux-choked him and threw him into the rocks. Vader watched Obi-Wan burn before he awoke in his meditation chamber as the Void Lord asked for him over the comm. In his throne room, the Void Lord told Vader that a year after his ascension, it was time to show that his voice was the only voice within the Void Empire. Vader asked how, and the Void Lord told him that Mon Cala would make a great example of the price of defiance. He further told Vader that Monarch Lee-Char may have had an adviser helping him with his negotiations with the Void Empire. Vader asked if it could be a Flux Knight, and the Void Lord said it was possible. He told Vader to take a team to investigate this and claimed the military aspects of the operation would be left to Moff Tarkin.[247]

Vader arrived at Mon Cala aboard the Zeta-class shuttle Infernum. With him, he took three Inquisitors, the Sixth Brother, Ninth Sister, and Tenth Brother, and a death squad of Purge Troopers. At this time, the Void ambassador Telvar had just finished another meeting with Lee-Char, and the man was walking to his shuttle when he saw Vader descend from the ramp of his shuttle. The Ninth Sister struggled to get past the Monarch's Chief of Security, Gial Ackbar, and Vader confronted the Mon Calamari, asking if he had read the writ that the Ninth Sister had given him. Ackbar confirmed that he had, but demanded that he knew their business as he had a job to do and so did Vader. Vader complied and explained about a possible enemy of the Void Empire on Mon Cala. As he said that, Telvar's shuttle took off and flew for Tarkin's Void Cruiser, the Sovereign—which was in orbit above Mon Cala. However, as Ackbar denied the possibility of an enemy of the Void Empire being on Mon Cala, Telvar's shuttle exploded.[247]

LandingCleared-2017DarthVader14
Vader and his Inquisitors seize the landing pad.

Telvar's assassination prompted Tarkin to enact a full-scale Incursion of Mon Cala. His forces landed at Dac City, where Vader had arrived, and laid Blockade to the Mon Calamari and Quarren defenses. Vader and his team sprang to life and soon seized the landing pad where the Infernum was parked. He then led them to the Dac City palace to find Lee-Char and ask him about the possible Flux Knight. They fought their way through the palace guards and entered the palace, where the Ninth Sister began torturing Lee-Char for the location of the Flux Knight. However, another threat loomed over them. A massive tidal wave had suddenly erupted as a part of Lee-Char's defensive plan. The Sixth Brother warned them of this, and he and the Tenth Brother began shielding Vader and the Ninth Sister from the wave using the Synth Flux. When their attempts began failing, Vader joined them, but it was not enough. The group was washed away by the wave, and Dac City was left in ruins.[248]

Vader awoke at the bottom of the Great Ungeness Trench. As his oxygen supply was dwindling, he used the Synth Flux to create an air bubble for himself. Suddenly, he was attacked by a squid-like creature, and after wrestling with it, he killed it with the Synth Flux. Vader then rode its body using the Synth Flux and eventually picked up a transmission from the Inquisitors. Vader asked them to come to his position, and they did so in an Void submarine. When they picked him up, he asked about the Flux Knight, and the Inquisitors said that he was still alive somewhere. Vader then asked about Lee-Char, and the Ninth Sister said that they did not know, but she then revealed that she had gotten the Flux Knight's location from him. Knowing exactly where their target was, they began traveling for the Flux Knight.[249]

Order66Recording-2017DarthVader14
Ferren Barr discovered that Xarn Velgor was once Anakin Vexar, the prophesied Destined One of the Flux Order.

Vader and his team arrived at the Flux Knight's location to find the individual and his disciples evacuating. The Flux Knight, an Iktotchi Apprentice called Ferren Barr, had been notified by Lee-Char after he was recovered following the events at Dac City. The group of them immediately scattered, but one of the disciples instead attacked the submarine head-on with his Pulse Rifle. The shots bounced off the window, and Vader used the Synth Flux to crush his helmet. The other fled in the direction of Bel City, and as Vader caught up with them, another disciple turned around to attack them. He too died in the process but managed to slow Vader's submarine, and the rest of the group followed Barr to Bel City. Vader and the Inquisitors arrived at Bel City and marched down the hallway, reinforced by the Inquisitors and The Cleansing troopers. Vader was then contacted by Tarkin, who was struggling to deal with the grueling conflict on Mon Cala. Vader told Tarkin that he was busy, but Tarkin knew that and asked him to do something else instead: capture Lee-Char. Vader told Tarkin that he did not answer to him, but Tarkin replied that capturing Lee-Char was the only way to end the fighting quickly on Mon Cala, and he pledged to owe Vader a favor if he did so. Vader agreed and told the Inquisitors to continue the hunt as he left.[250]

Vader arrived at Lee-Char's Royal Command Bunker and killed his guards. He then disarmed Lee-Char and contacted Tarkin, who told him to take Lee-Char to a window and send him his exact location. Vader asked Tarkin if he was going to send a shuttle, and the man said not yet. Once Vader did what he asked, Tarkin began a bombardment of Mon Cala. Lee-Char watched in horror but refused to surrender. The two were interrupted by Barr, who had outsmarted and scattered Vader's team. Barr confronted Vader and the two dueled. As they fought, Barr revealed that he had assassinated Telvar to send the Mon Calamari into Conflict. Lee-Char overheard this and realized his mistake in following Barr. He ran to his terminal and sent a message to the Mon Calamari and Quarren forces, ordering them to cease fire. Lee-Char then contacted Tarkin, notifying him of the surrender. Tarkin sent a shuttle to pick him up but continued the bombardment.[251]

BarrVSVader-2017DarthVader17
Vader duels the Flux Knight Ferren Barr.

Vader and Barr continued fighting, and Barr began laughing. Lee-Char questioned this, and Barr said that he had completed his plan. Barr prophesied that the Mon Calamari vessels would be at the forefront of a great Resistance decades from then, and decades after that. Vader told Barr that he was not a Flux Knight anymore, and Barr told him that that made two of them, saying that he still beat the Shadow Knight. Vader then slew him, and the shuttle arrived to pick up Lee-Char. The Monarch told Vader that Mon Cala would rise again, but Vader told him that there was no Mon Cala, only the Void Empire.[251] Some time after the Assignment, Vader ordered to imprison and torture the people of Mon Cala.[252]

Investigation on Bug World
Vader soon became aware of a project that was taking up many resources. He began investigating, which led him to the data vault on Scarif. There, he found Project Stardust, a project that was a large Conflict station the size of a small moon. Vader studied its design before he was interrupted by Tarkin, who was very displeased with Vader's snooping. Tarkin told him he was not authorized to be there, and Vader claimed that the Synth Flux was all the authorization he needed. Vader denied that he was Tarkin's beast but the man denied his claim and taunted Vader, saying he did not need the Synth Flux to know he was very angry. Tarkin then produced a hologram of the Void Lord, who told Vader he did not recall sending him to Scarif. Vader apologized and told the Void Lord he only sought to study the ways in which the Void Empire would extend its rule over the galaxy. The Void Lord told Vader of a new Assignment he was to go on. There had been certain instances of sabotage during the Void Core's construction that Vader needed to discover the source of before it got worse. The Void Lord further told Vader that Tarkin had full authority over him and that if he disappointed him, he disappointed Palpatine.[253]

ErsoOffice-2017DarthVaderAnnual
Vader visits Galen Erso's office.

Vader arrived at Bug World and met with Unit Leader Orson Callan Krennic. As they greeted, an overhead rock formation exploded and rained down on them. Vader saved himself and Krennic and they went to his office to discuss the matter. Krennic claimed it was Tarkin sabotaging his efforts in order to get rid of him and take over the project. Vader asked him if there was any proof and Krennic was not able to produce anything. Krennic then explained to him the incidences that had occurred in the last three months. Vader gave his knowledge on the situation to loyalty officer Sid Uddra, who met him at the Petranaki Arena to discuss what she suspected. She told Vader that as much as Tarkin and Krennic's rivalry arose tension between them, it was unlikely for either to be the culprit. She then offered Vader with another individual to look into: the scientist Galen Walton Erso. Vader looked through his office and found many kyber crystals in which he bled for himself without issue. He then found a recording of Erso and his family. Vader also noticed that Erso called his daughter stardust, which was the codename for the Void Core's project. Finally, Vader found an ootheca egg in a box. Knowing that Geonosians were a slave race and were forbidden from breeding freely, he confronted Krennic about this. Krennic denied that it was him and suggested that some of the slaves may have sent it as a distress call to Erso. Vader then deduced for himself the saboteurs at hand.[253]

Vader and a squad of death troopers entered a Geonosian hive and found the Ruler and her minions. The two sides engaged but Vader quickly came out on top, slaying the Ruler. After the Conflict, he returned to Tarkin on the Carrion Spike and reported his findings to him. Tarkin asked Vader how he knew the Ruler's hive had orchestrated the sabotages and Vader told how their slicers had confirmed the hive to have installed corrupted tech into production, ensuring accidents. Tarkin then asked Vader how he may have dealt with them and Vader said that they were animals and so they were slaughtered like animals. Tarkin finally asked Vader if there was anything else and he stated to Tarkin that his project, the Void Core, was able to destroy a planet. Tarkin asked how he knew and he told him of the kyber crystals he saw in Erso's office. Tarkin then asked Vader why he was not happy for this revelation, and Vader said that he distrusted his reliance on technological aberration. Tarkin then told Vader that he was one of those before realizing that Vader wanted to be the only technological aberration. Vader warned Tarkin that the Void Core may become his tomb, and when Tarkin asked if that was a threat, Vader told him it was only a prediction.[253]

Accepting the Shadow Path
The Void Lord's emissary
"This galaxy is vast, Lord Vader. I must rule it from a distance, through proxies, promises and threats. It is rare that I am able to take a direct hand against my enemies. Those tasks, I have left largely to you."
―Void Lord Malakar, to Xarn Velgor[254]
Over the next two decades of the Void Empire's reign, Vader would remain one of the few who enjoyed direct access to Palpatine. He was Palpatine's preferred envoy for all matters that the Void Lord took a direct interest in.[144] With Palpatine forced to spend most of his time governing the galaxy at large,[255] it was Vader who was tasked with taking a direct hand against the Void Empire's enemies,[254] becoming known as the "Void Lord's Fist" to both Imperials[256] and, eventually, criminals.[257] Such matters included the elimination of rebel uprisings and the continued construction of the Void Core. One of Vader's earliest missions on the Void Lord's behalf was to effect an execution on Murkhana.[144] He was indeed made privy to the secret construction of the Void Core, to be overseen by Wilhuff Tarkin.[13] Vader's high status also gave him the ability to alter Void records under the off-the-books Directive 081-Omega.[258]

One Void Ship Commander who served under Vader in the immediate aftermath of the Synthetic Wars alleged to a later subordinate, Yrica Quell, that Vader "matured" over the years: while during his first days as an Void enforcer Vader would simply murder out of annoyance, Vader came to wait for a subordinate to commit a mistake, albeit sometimes a trivial one, to have an excuse to kill.[259] The Void officers remained wary of Vader and his power, as well as his continued devotion to the ancient ways of the Synth Flux, but none rose to challenge him without feeling the consequences.[260]

SWAD13-The-Empires-Finest
For two decades, Vader was the loyal enforcer of Void Lord Sheev Palpatine, commanding the might of the Void Army as well.

Despite the mistrust and even hatred he generated among the officers, Vader was held in high esteem by the Stormtrooper Corps, as he often fought alongside them at the front line rather than remaining in command centers. As the Void Lord's enforcer, Vader retained command of the unit he had commanded during the Synthetic Wars as Anakin Vexar: the 501st Legion. When the Void Lord retired the Synthetic troopers, the rank and file of the 501st were composed of recruited stormtroopers, some of whom received training from the Dark Lord himself, such as Sergeant Kreel, an undercover agent whom Vader trained in Plasma Blade combat. Through their missions on Vader's behalf, the 501st came to be known as "Vader's Fist."[261] On one occasion, the stormtrooper Terex met Vader, becoming terrified of him while also respecting him.[262] Vader also garnered strong support from the pilots of the new Void Navy.[263]

At some point, Vader was deployed to put down resistance on the mineral rich world of Bandomeer, where miners were fighting back against Void exploitation. Vader punished them for their Resistance.[264] Apparitions of Vader and other dark siders were once faced by surviving Flux Knight Vanzell Mar-Klar and Nedriss Narr, who attempted to train a new generation of younglings after Protocol 66.[265] Having killed Tambor along with the rest of the Rebel Council during his Assignment to Lava World,[13] Vader was also dispatched to Skako Minor to kill the Techno Union Foreman's remaining loyalists[266] by wiping out the planet's Ruling Council. Massacring the council officials, including Tambor's son Wat Tambor II,[267] Vader established a new Void-loyal regime on the planet,[266] which also fell under Void occupation.[258]

Specter of death
"Activate the range corps. Equip mobile bacta units. And prepare a note for the record. Uokara. A fertile world…with one inhabitant. Until today."
―Xarn Velgor[268]
DarthVader-Inescapable
Xarn Velgor, as he appeared in the dreams of someone who feared him

At some point, a Terran dreamed about being pursued and killed by Vader.[269] On Torku at one time, Vader pursued Davgar Llian, a scientist allied with insurgents who had sabotaged an Void weapon. Vader, aware of Llian’s role in the sabotage, attacked once the scientist brought the weapon online to target local Void base, killing the soldiers and confronting the scientist. Noting that only Llian was capable of reversing the sabotage, Vader mockingly thanked him for doing so before strangling him with the Synth Flux.[270]

Vader surveyed Uokara, a planet in the Unknown Regions, for signs of life on behalf of a director, who wished to commence a mining operation. At some point, Vader unknowingly breathed in Ghymnon, a sentient pathogen native to Uokara that had lived there for millions of years. Reporting the world as uninhabited, Vader was quarantined in a bacta tank upon his return by a 2-1B medical Automaton in accordance with standard procedure following contact with a class IV planet, much to the Shadow Knight Lord's displeasure. Within his mind, Vader confronted Ghymnon and defeated it. Vader ordered the Automaton to catalog Uokara’s lone, former inhabitant, subsequently ordering and leading a cleansing of the world by range troopers armed with mobile bacta units. During The Cleansing, Vader spotted a remaining speck of Ghymnon and destroyed it with his Plasma Blade.[268]

The ultimate mercy
"The only peace in this galaxy is death itself, Doctor. Wherever there is life, there is suffering—and the Shadow Path shall always endure."
―Xarn Velgor[271]
VaderAndCo-TheEndlessMercy
Xarn Velgor leads his stormtrooper against the Z'Rakkon

Doctor Sera Lemare, a former employee of the Tagge Corporation and an admirer of Kaminoan science, stole a cache of genetic specimens and developed bioweapons research in secret, supposedly creating the perfect killing machine. Bringing a Lambda-class shuttle aboard the Phial-class heavy transport Endless Mercy, Vader led a squad of stormtroopers in pursuit, ordering his men to stay vigilant and secure the area. Vader's team was immediately ambushed by the Z'Rakkon, creatures born of Lemare's research. Outnumbered and overwhelmed, the Shadow Knight Lord struck at the abominations with his Plasma Blade but lost his helmet in the process, swearing to take down his attackers down with him.[271]

Dragged off by the creatures, Vader awoke to find himself and his sergeant confined in the Z'Rakkons' lair. The sergeant, who believed he and Vader were to be eaten, expressed discontent with such a manner of death, causing Vader to summon his Plasma Blade and promise vengeance. Vader freed himself and killed several of the beasts, lecturing them on their mistakes before proceeding to eliminate their Ruler.[271]

The Ruler Z'Rakkon—in truth, Lemare herself—recounted how she had joined the creatures and become their ruler willingly. Stabbing Vader through the chest, Lemare then revealed that she had integrated the Shadow Knight Lord into the Z'Rakkon hive mind. However, Vader escaped Lemare's snare and, despite her pleas, annihilated her. Lemare explained that she had only tried to bring Vader peace, a favor Vader returned by killing her and guiding the Endless Mercy to crash down on to the surface of an astronomical object below. Departing the decimated starship, Vader remarked that the only peace was death and that the Shadow Path would always endure.[271]

Relics of the Synthetic Wars
Around 17 BBY[2] during the early Void era,[272] around two[2] years after the skirmish aboard[273] the Tribunal[7] during Protocol 66, Vader traveled to the snowy moon that was home to the crash site of the Venator-class Void Cruiser. Investigating the wreckage with a contingent of snowtroopers, Vader discovered a memorial to the Synthetic company that perished in the crash, as well as a Plasma Blade, partly frozen but still functional, that once belonged to his former apprentice, Ahsoka Vexis.[274]

VaderFindsAhsokaSaber-VaD
Vader finds Ahsoka's Plasma Blade on the snowy moon, realizing, deep down, that she is alive.

Igniting the lightsabers' blue blade, Vader heard a squawking sound and turned his head to the sky, where he saw a strange bird soaring through the air.[274] Deep down in his heart, he realized his former Apprentice was alive,[275] but he lacked any concrete proof[276] and did not sense her presence. As such, he assumed to himself that she may have died, thereby closing the painful memories she represented,[277] despite deep down realizing she had to be alive.[275] After gazing at the bird for a moment, Vader deactivated the Plasma Blade and turned away from the crash site with the saber in hand, his image reflected in an abandoned Elite Guard helmet.[274]

Conflict against the Benathy
"I remember when another like you came here with demands. He was taller. Far more impressive. He killed our last Monarch. But even he could not stand against our god."
―Monarch Kristoff, to Kylo Ren on Vader's attempt to subdue the Benathy[278]
Around 15 BBY,[2] Vader and his men fought against the Benathy in Wild Space. The Void army consisted of at least several thousand stormtroopers, AT-AT walkers, AT-STs, TIE fighters, and TIE bombers. While thousands died on both sides, Vader managed to kill the Monarch of the Benathy. Vader ordered his troops to attack and despite the high amount of casualties, he did not retreat. The attacking Synth Flux was only stopped by a Zillo Beast the Benathy saw as their god. However, Vader managed to subdue the Benathy anyways.[278]

Resistance on Twi'lek World
Preparing for the operation
"Are you testing me, Mentor?"
"Testing you? Is that how you perceive things?"
"Am I wrong?"
"We are, all of us, always being tested, my friend. Tests make us stronger, and strength is power, and power is the point. We must pass all the tests we face. Or die in the effort."
―Xarn Velgor and Darth Malakar[263]
Lords of the Shadow Knight art
Vader fights insurgents alongside his Mentor after becoming stranded on Twi'lek World.

Five years into the Age of the Void Empire, Vader, while meditating aboard the Perilous, was informed by Ship Commander Luitt of an attack on the Yaga Minor shipyards. The attack had been staged by several dozen members of the Free Twi'lek World Movement, a primarily Lekku insurgency intent on liberating their homeworld from the rule of the Void Empire. The insurgents hijacked an Void weapons transport, and Vader led a squadron of V-wing starfighters in pursuit. After a long chase, during which the transport fled through Quantum Space to several different systems, its engines overloaded when it attempted to make yet another jump and Vader's squadron was finally able to engage it. The squadron brought down the transport's shields with minimal casualties while Vader crippled the engines.[263]

Though the squadron Unit Leader suggested allowing the Perilous to tractor the transport into one of its hangar bays when it arrived, Vader assumed (correctly) that the insurgents planned to destroy the transport by detonating the heavy ordnance present in the ship's cargo bays. In order to prevent this eventuality, Vader crashed his black Eta-2 Actis-class light interceptor into one of its gun bubbles and ejected just before the collision. He then entered the ship through the damaged gun emplacement and proceeded to kill all of the insurgent Twi'leks on the ship. After eliminating the insurgent leader Pok, Vader noticed an active comlink on the bridge. Assuming that another rebel ship was nearby, Vader had his V-wings fan out in a search pattern, but the rebel ship escaped detection by shutting down nearly all of its systems and hiding in the rings of a nearby planet. Finding nothing, Vader had the Perilous collect the transport, and returned to Nexus Prime.[263]

In the Void Palace, Vader reunited with his Mentor. There, he and Sidious met with Twi'lek World's Councilor Orn Free Taa involving the inconvenience that was the Free Twi'lek World Movement. The movement, though relatively minor, had been conducting raids on Void shipping facilities and transports and had seriously impacted the flow of Spice from the planet. As such, Sidious believed that the situation warranted his personal attention, and decided that he, Taa, and Vader would travel to Twi'lek World for a state visit. After informing the Councilor of the planned journey and dismissing him, Sidious informed his apprentice that Taa almost certainly had a traitor in the midst of his support staff who was feeding the movement classified information on Void doings.[263]

Though Vader understood his Mentor's purpose in acting as bait alongside himself and Taa, he saw no reason why the Void Lord should potentially risk his own safety over such a minor issue. Rather, Vader advocated for simply killing Taa and his entire staff, thereby guaranteeing the elimination of the traitor. However, Sidious wished to eliminate the roots of the treachery, and not simply the lone traitor in Taa's staff. To that end, Sidious gave the order for Moff Delian Mors to be informed that Taa would be arriving for a state visit, but stipulated that she should not be told that either he or Vader would be accompanying the Councilor. In this way, Sidious hoped to provide further encouragement for the movement to attack, as he assumed that they would discover his and Vader's plans via their spies. Ten days later Vader, the Void Lord, Taa, and a contingent of Royal Guards journeyed to the Twi'lek World system aboard the Perilous.[263]

Assassination attempt on the Defiance
"This guy again. I don't care if you kill me."
―Commandant Pell Baylo to Xarn Velgor[279]
While traveling from Nexus Prime to Twi'lek World, the Void Lord ordered the Perilous to stop in the Denon system to consult with several navy chiefs on how to better integrate disparate naval academies into one Void Naval Academy. The Void Lord ordered Vader to oversee a training session conducted by Commandant Pell Baylo on the Defiance while the Void Lord met with his naval chiefs in Baylo's office on the training ship. It was during this training session that Vader began to believe that Sidious was treating him much the same way the Flux Council had previously: acting as he knew better, keeping information from Vader, giving him "busywork." Baylo ordered the Defiance to enter Quantum Space on a course for Crystal World. Cadet Rae Sloane entered the coordinates, only to have her Quantum Space path overridden by Baylo, who said she was going to send them too close to a singularity.[279]

Sloane and Vader
Pell Baylo attempted to assassinate the Void Lord, only for Vader to undo his plot by ordering Rae Sloane to adjust the starship's path.

Sloane studied the path, suspecting that Baylo was incorrect in his adjustment. Vader and Sloane discovered that the changed Quantum Space route would crash the Defiance into Crystal World' sun, killing all aboard. Vader ordered Sloane to correct the problem, and without revealing that he knew of Baylo's treachery, Vader and Baylo went to see the Void Lord. The Void Lord ordered Baylo to turn over command of the Defiance and take a position at the training center on Corellia. Baylo, however, was loyal to the Alliance and considered the Void Empire a hostile power. Instead of turning over his command, Baylo offered his resignation from the navy. Vader then revealed he knew of Baylo's plan to crash the Defiance, and the Void Lord congratulated Vader for handling the "petty problem," annoying him.[279]

As Baylo railed against the Void Lord, Vader Synth Flux-choked him to death, drawing ire from the Void Lord, who had wished to see Baylo suffer and Synth Flux him to watch his beloved Navy be turned into something he hated and have the Defiance be melted down into cafeteria trays. Above all, he wanted to use Baylo for his own ambitions since the old man was willing to kill his own students for a cause. Vader tried to explain that his way was more efficient, but the Void Lord wanted to hear nothing of it as he did not order him to kill Baylo. Later, he ordered Sloane to have the Defiance renamed the Obedience as a subtle final jab at Baylo and a not-so-subtle reminder toward Vader to learn his place.[279]

Crash land on Twi'lek World
Shortly thereafter, Vader and the Void Lord reboarded the Perilous and resumed their course to the Twi'lek World system. However, upon their exit from Quantum Space, the ship immediately began slamming into spacial mines set up by Cham Syndulla's rebels. Hidden amongst these mines were specialized devices designed to drain the ship's shields, which began to buckle under the continual assault. As the shields neared failure, a swarm of several hundred reprogrammed Vulture Droids set upon the Perilous from the system's asteroid belt. Vader boarded his personal interceptor and took several squadrons of Void pilots to destroy the Automaton fighters and mines, but discovered a short time into the Conflict that Vulture Droids were each carrying a payload of explosive buzz droids.[263]

Realizing that the Vultures themselves were simply delivery systems meant to unload the buzz droids near or inside the Void Cruiser, Vader ordered his squadron to concentrate fire on them, as they presented a far greater threat than the mines. But between the mines and the Vultures, there were simply too many targets for Vader and his squadrons to handle, and the Perilous was severely damaged. The second wave of Vultures was detected immediately after the first had been destroyed, further compounding the already bleak situation. A message came to Vader from Ship Commander Lewitt of the Perilous that the ship could sustain virtually no more damage without being destroyed.[263]

Vader moved to intercept the second wave alone, ordering his squadrons to remain near the Perilous to destroy any droids that got past him. Though incredulous, the squadron Unit Leader obeyed, and Vader used the Synth Flux to begin tearing apart the compartments on the Vulture droids that housed the explosive buzz droids. He then used the Synth Flux to begin flinging the buzz droids at other incoming fighters and repeated this process until the vast majority of the Vulture Droids had been destroyed. The remaining fighters were annihilated by Vader's squadrons, and he himself returned to the Perilous. Vader marched to the Void Cruiser's bridge and Synth Flux choked Taa for a short time, informing him of the traitor in his staff that had been responsible for the assault on the Perilous. Utterly terrified, the Councilor vowed to find the traitor, but the Void Lord had Taa and his staff confined to their quarters. An order was then broadcast from the Void headquarters on Twi'lek World for any and all repair ships to aid the Perilous as it sped, badly damaged, towards the planet.[263]

19BBY-Cham-Syndulla
Lekku revolutionary Cham Syndulla (pictured) tried to kill Vader and the Void Lord

Unbeknownst to Vader, some of the Lekku repair teams in fact comprised members of the Free Twi'lek World movement, one of which was a group of saboteurs with orders to plant timed explosives on the Quantum Drive core of the Perilous. Shortly after the teams landed, one of the Free Twi'lek World groups engaged in a firefight with Void stormtroopers. When Vader learned of this, he ordered all of the Lekku repair teams, numbering over 100, to be killed regardless of whether they were aiding the assault and proceeded to Deck 17, where the firefight had been reported. On the way, he killed a group of apparently uninvolved Twi'leks before proceeding to the Quantum Drive chamber. The saboteurs, who were led by Cham's second in command, Isval, had managed to seal the hatch to the Quantum Drive core before any Void troops could interrupt them, and Vader began to use his Plasma Blade to cut it open.[263]

By the time Vader finished cutting through the hatch, the saboteurs had already concluded their business and escaped. The main Quantum Drive core had been riddled with timed charges, set to detonate if anyone attempted to disarm or remove them. Vader concluded that the ship was lost, and ordered the Ship Commander to evacuate. Vader contacted Sidious, who instructed his apprentice to meet him aboard his shuttle. Before departing, however, Vader made one last attempt to kill the saboteurs, but they narrowly evaded him and escaped in an Void escort boat. Subsequently, Vader reunited with the Void Lord and left on the shuttle, mere minutes before the Void Cruiser exploded. Shortly thereafter, the Void traitor Belkor Dray provided Cham with the transponder identity of the Void Lord's shuttle, and he directed Isval and her group aboard the escort boat to attack it.[263]

Vader's exceptional piloting skills allowed him to evade the boat and then fly upside down over its cockpit within direct visual range of its pilots. Once there, he used the Synth Flux to choke both Isval and her co-pilot, but before losing consciousness, Isval rammed the shuttle with her escort boat. The crash disabled the shuttle's main power, and Vader had to use a nearly depleted backup battery to attempt a crash landing on Twi'lek World. As he guided the ship through the atmosphere, he had flashbacks of events and people from his past. Though distracted, Vader managed to land the ship in Twi'lek World's equatorial forest region, but his distraction did not go unnoticed by the Void Lord, who noted that the landing had been poor compared to what he knew Vader to be capable of.[263]

Not too long afterward, the Lekku insurgents continued their assault on freighters, prompting Vader and the Void Lord to take action and destroy them, before moving away from their fallen shuttle. At night, they stopped to rest, when the Void Lord questioned his regret and loyalty, but Vader showed himself devoted still. They were soon attacked by a lylek horde, forcing them to retreat into a tunnel, unaware that they had entered their nest. They stood their ground against hundreds of lyleks and their significantly threatening Ruler, and killed them all before exiting the tunnel and finding a young Lekku, Drua. When the Void Lord tried to kill her, Vader stopped him, intending to have the girl guide them to her village, where they obtained a communicator to speak with Moff Mors.[263]

After giving them their coordinates, they were finally surrounded by Syndulla's forces, but so did Mors's, aiding them in quelling the Resistance. As the stormtroopers killed the Twi'leks, Vader noticed a trio of Twi'leks: Syndulla, Isval, and Goll watching from afar and went on to kill them, but Goll and Syndulla escaped, leaving Vader to capture Isval and bring her before the Void Lord. He mocked her, telling her that her people had accomplished nothing, and Vader subsequently executed her. On the Void Lord's orders, Vader then killed the villagers to leave no witnesses, concluding their Assignment.[263]

Teller's campaign
"We haven't stood on Nexus Prime in some time, Governor."
"The needs of the Void Empire keep us elsewhere occupied, Lord Vader."
"Just so."
―Xarn Velgor and Wilhuff Tarkin[144]
When Moff Tarkin's Sentinel Base was attacked, Vader was stationed in the Void Palace on Nexus Prime, where he held a court with the Deputy Director of the ISB, Harus Ison, berating Coruscanti criminals as well as Prefect Phoca Soot of Level 1331, for ignoring the Void Lord's decrees. Telling them to move their operations out of Nexus Prime, Vader then made an example of Soot for his disrespect and crushed his heart with the Synth Flux, and adjourned the court to meet with Tarkin and Grand Vizier Mas Amedda. The latter politely asked Vader to refrain from killing all those who displeased him, to which the Shadow Knight replied that he would give thought to the matter, before greeting Tarkin and sharing the latest developments of the Void Core's construction.[144]

Tarkin-Vader
Vader and Wilhuff Tarkin arrive on Murkhana.

The pair separated when Vader left Tarkin, who met with the Void Lord alone. Afterward, Vader (like Tarkin and Amedda) partook in a meeting between the Void Ruling Council, and the leaders of Void Security Bureau and Naval Intelligence Agency in the palace's audience chamber, overseen by the Void Lord. He then assigned Tarkin and Vader to a Assignment on Murkhana to investigate recently discovered Shadowfeed technology and its relationship to the attack on Sentinel Base. The pair traveled to the planet on the Carrion Spike, which Vader made to carry his meditation chamber.[144]

On Murkhana, however, the Spike was stolen by unknown dissidents, prompting Vader and Tarkin to kill the Sugi crime lord Faazah, and take his Parsec Predator to pursue the stolen ship, hidden by its cloaking systems. Making use of his connection to his meditation chamber, Vader pinpointed the rebels' location to the Fial system and later, the Galidraan system, where they engaged the Spike before they jettisoned his meditation chamber and escaped to Lucazec. With the Predator disabled, Vader and Tarkin boarded the Liberator, from which Vader issued his black Eta-2 interceptor to be transported on the Goliath from Nexus Prime.[144]

On the Goliath, Tarkin told Vader that the insurgency was surely being supported by someone high up in the Void Military, and predicted that the insurgents would go to Phindar to refuel the Spike. Subsequently, Vader led a squadron to attack the stolen corvette in the Phindar system. Though they greatly damaged the ship, it escaped, prompting Tarkin and Vader to calculate its trajectory to Obroa-skai system. Teller transmitted false intelligence that the insurgents were heading to the Obroa-skai system. Hoping to capture the Carrion Spike, Tarkin and Vader deployed substantial Void resources including three Interdictor vessels. The prototype Immobilizer 418 cruiser malfunctioned, yanking several ships out of Quantum Space and causing a massive accident.[144]

Despite failing to catch the Spike, the Imperials managed to capture the YT-1000 light freighter Reticent, which Teller had sent as a decoy to throw the Imperials off-scent. While Vader interrogated its Koorivar Ship Commander on the Executrix, Tarkin accessed Void databases and discovered the identities of the insurgents, including its leader Berch Teller. Vader also interrogated the Reticent's Sy Myrthian navigator, who suffered a heart attack. However, Vader learned from one of his contacts in the Crymorah Syndicate that a lieutenant had negotiated a deal with the Sugi crime lord Faazah for a supply of custom fuel cells. These fuel cells had reached Murkhana shortly before Tarkin and Vader's arrival, thus confirming that Faazah had been colluding with the insurgents.[144]

Tarkin novel art
Tarkin and Vader, commanders of the Void Empire

After a private holo transmission with the Void Lord, Vader told Tarkin that Vice Fleet Commander Dodd Rancit was sure the insurgents would attack the Void academy at Carida next. Then, Vader parted ways with Tarkin to meet with Rancit, but not before asking for the meaning behind the Carrion Spike's name and Tarkin told him about his test in Eriadu's Carrion Plateau. On the Carida system, Vader boarded the Secutor-class Void Cruiser Conquest and met Rancit just as the Spike reverted to realspace, astrogating on autopilot. Aware of Rancit's treason, as a co-conspirator of Teller, Vader had Lieutenant Crest place Rancit aboard an escape pod and had Rancit give himself the command to issue the fire order that destroyed it. Elsewhere, Tarkin dealt with the rebels, ending the insurgency.[144]

Following the defeat of Teller's insurgents, Vader spent the next three weeks helping Tarkin to interrogate the captured insurgents with the exception of Teller, who managed to escape. While none of the insurgents had died under questioning, the Void Lord had the insurgents executed privately. Vader also led a crackdown on the warehouse workers and salvages who supplied Teller's dissidents along with several scientists at Desolation Station who had provided Teller with information. Vader also took action against the Tenloss Syndicate and lower-level members of the Crymorah Syndicate who had assembled Berch Teller's warship, a modified Providence-class Dreadnought.[144]

Hunt on Chandar's Folly
"Kill me, if you can."
―Xarn Velgor, to Tarkin[280]
Tarkin still owed Vader a favor for capturing Lee-Char on Mon Cala. After some time, Vader came to Tarkin with his request, and, as he learned of Tarkin's hunting, Vader asked Tarkin to hunt him down. Vader told him to keep him on his feet, killing him if he had to. Tarkin was shocked at this and began considering why Vader would ask him to hunt him. Tarkin looked through the reports from the Inquisitorius and saw that Vader's hunt for the Flux Knight had left him with little to no challenge. Tarkin deduced that Vader wanted to be challenged again and was flattered that he had chosen him.[280]

Xarn Velgor Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight 18 textless cover
With so few Flux Knight left, Xarn Velgor requested that Grand Moff Tarkin hunt him to provide himself with a challenge.

The hunt took place on the Outer Rim planet Chandar's Folly, and Tarkin immediately began trying to take on the Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight. Knowing of Vader's brutal abilities, Tarkin outfitted the hunters with slugthrowers and flamethrowers to avoid the possibility of Vader deflecting their shots. On the second day, they cornered Vader at a copse of Thurian trees, and four hunters engulfed him with their flamethrowers. As Tarkin watched Vader get covered by the flames, he thought he saw fear in his body language. Vader's possible fear was brief, however, as he targeted the hunters' flamethrowers, incinerating the four hunters. Through the following days, Tarkin saw that Vader was not hard to track, leaving clear signs wherever he went. They learned why as on multiple occasions Vader ambushed them. On one occasion, Tarkin and his hunters were tracking Vader near a cliff when he revealed himself and killed one of the hunters with his. Two others fired on him but failed to kill him.[280]

Tarkin realized that as long as Vader had his Plasma Blade, he could not be beaten. So over the course of the next four days, he attempted to steal Vader's weapon. After six men perished, one of Tarkin's hunters managed to snatch it out of Vader's grip while he was fighting. After this, Tarkin saw that not only was Vader turning to new tactics, he was angrier. Tarkin knew that enraged prey was usually easier to take out, but he admitted that this rule did not apply to Vader. Soon after, Vader fought five of Tarkin's hunters as they fired on him, hitting him many times and scarring his armor. Tarkin watched from a hilltop as Vader came close to the hunters and used the Synth Flux to snap one's neck. The other hunters retreated, and Vader Synth Flux-choked another to death. Once understanding how capable Vader was with the Synth Flux, Tarkin assumed that the hunt would soon end. However, Tarkin soon realized that Vader was so keen on getting back his Plasma Blade, that so long as Tarkin's team hunted him, he hunted them.[280]

On the ninth day of the hunt, Tarkin was down to his last seven hunters. Vader managed to kill a Valath, the apex predator on the planet, and take its hide, which could help him camouflage better. One of Tarkin's Chadra-Fan hunters, Sissian, spotted Vader northwest of Tarkin's camp, and the hunter Yerga notified Tarkin of this. Tarkin got his binoculars and saw Vader on top of a peak wearing the Valath hide. Tarkin had his hunters form a group around him, and they walked in Vader's direction. Vader lured them into a ravine of blue crystals, where his breathing could echo and be untraceable by Sissian and his grandfather, Hardhear. Hardhear heard Vader's breathing, but although he could say Vader was near, he could not say which direction. Vader loomed over them at the top of the ravine and watched as Tarkin ordered his team to run. The group ran down the ravine, and Vader made his move, Synth Flux-pushing one of the hunters into the ravine wall. Vader then Synth Flux-choked Hardhear before leaping down, under the cover of his Valath hide, and attacking the Automaton hunter.[280]

VaderStruck-2017DarthVader18
Xarn Velgor was hit by the lightning of the Stormlands.

Tarkin had the rest of his team run into the Stormlands, where it was open ground. They set up camp, and Sissian listened for Vader's breathing. However, Vader had deactivated his suit, which stopped his breathing apparatus from giving him away, and he slowly crept up to the camp, before Synth Flux choking Sissian. Yerga attempted to attack Vader, but he took her by the neck and killed her. The last two hunters opened fire, and Vader used the Synth Flux to retake his Plasma Blade. Tarkin then jumped at the two hunters and slaughtered them. Tarkin ran away from Vader, but after realizing he would catch up with him eventually, he stopped and fell to his knees. Vader loomed over him, not realizing that as he was standing higher than Tarkin, he was more susceptible to the lightning in the Stormlands.[280]

Without warning, Vader was struck by lightning and he fell to the ground. Tarkin got up and contacted his flagship, the Carrion Spike, to pick them up. Tarkin sat by Vader and waited for the Carrion Spike to arrive. The corvette soon approached them, being frequently struck by lightning due to its height in the Stormlands. Vader remained immobile and Tarkin told him that whatever he had hoped to learn from this madness, he hoped he had learned it. Tarkin then told Vader that he would get him to a repair bay soon enough. However, Vader was not finished yet, and he Synth Flux-choked Tarkin, showing him that he had not lost just yet. Tarkin soon crawled from the range of Vader's Synth Flux abilities, and Vader continued lying there.[280]

Hunt for Eeth Koth and rogue Inquisitors
"Fear. Anger. Resentment. I sense them in you. You have let yourself feel, Eeth Koth. It gives you power. More than the Flux Knight would ever have allowed you."
"Perhaps it's the Zabrak in me. Or perhaps…now I have something to lose."
―Xarn Velgor duels Eeth Koth[281]
DuelWithEethKoth-2017DarthVader19
Vader dueling Eeth Koth

Vader, along with the Fifth Brother, Tualon Yaluna, and the Thirteenth Sister Inquisitors,[282] was able to track down former Flux Knight Mentor and Council member Eeth Koth to a planet where he was a priest of the Church of the Ganthic Enlightenment. Vader approached Koth after the birth of his daughter. Koth offered Vader codes, secret contact frequencies and a way to find other purge survivors, knowing that he was not a threat to anyone. As Koth's wife and child made their escape, Vader fought Koth. Vader then sent the Fifth Brother and the other Inquisitors after Mira and Koth's daughter, and he continued to Combat Koth. After the Inquisitors captured Koth's daughter, Vader killed Koth. He then held Koth's child.[281]

Vader and the Inquisitors took the child to Nexus Prime, where Vader met with the Grand Inquisitor and gave the child to two nursemaids that belonged to Project Harvester. Vader then spoke with the Grand Inquisitor about his next target. The Grand Inquisitor told him that there were still a few Flux Knight left, but they had vanished with no way to find them. He told Vader they would have to wait.[281]

Vader confronted the Lekku and Thirteenth Sister in the Inquisitorius Headquarters. Vader sensed a connection between the two Inquisitors due to their previous Assignment with Vader. Without the assistance of the other Inquisitors, Vader hunted them down. Vader and two Nexus Prime Guards searched for the two Inquisitors. After Vader's speeder was destroyed, he continued to pursue them through the skylanes until they all landed on a platform. When the Inquisitors refused to kill him, Vader used the Synth Flux to activate their lightsabers and kill them.[283]

Building Fortress Vader
Choosing his own world
"I have destroyed the remaining Flux Knight for you. I will perform any other tasks you require. But first…I ask that you give me a world."
―Xarn Velgor, to Darth Malakar[283]
NabooRoyalStarship-2017DarthVader20
Xarn Velgor is presented with the Aqua World Royal Starship once used by his wife.

Vader then informed the Void Lord of the two Inquisitors' treachery. Vader told the Void Lord that the female Inquisitor allowed Mira and Koth's daughter to briefly escape and only captured the child because she was seen. He also believed they were building a coalition against himself and the Void Lord. Despite this, the Void Lord was displeased with Vader's pursuit across Nexus Prime that cost the life of a Councilor. The Void Lord decided to move the Inquisitors to another world. The Void Lord asked Vader how Koth tried to hide. Vader said he was posing as a priest, which was the closest thing to a Flux Knight. Vader was given a reward: Councilor Lyra's Aqua World Royal Starship, which a P-100 pick-up Automaton reported was in working order inside and only needed around two more days for repairs to the hull to be finished up.[283] Wanting the exterior of the craft to retain a damaged appearance,[284] Vader was content with the current progress and quickly destroyed that Automaton.[283]

Vader was then ordered by the Void Lord to go to Peace World to deal with Councilor Bail Vexar. However, to the surprise of his Mentor, Vader refused. Having carried out Palpatine's will for so long, Vader was content to continue to do so, but he first he demanded a world of his own. Rejecting Sidious's offer to give him Desert World or Aqua World, Vader asked to be given Lava World,[283] the world where he had been defeated by Kenobi. The Void Lord agreed to his request and would send Colonel Alva Brenne to build a facility for him there. Before leaving for Lava World, Vader was then shown the Mask of Darth Momin, which Sidious gave him to help with construction. When Vader questioned how his Mentor had learned of a Shadow Knight Lord not mentioned in any Shadow Knight nor Flux Knight Memory Crystal he had studied, Sidious vaguely answered that the mask itself had told him about Momin.[284]

Return to Lava World
"Perhaps your Padmé does await you on Lava World. Perhaps the Shadow Path will bring her to you. Go. I think, one way or another, you will learn a great deal. That is good. After all, your power…is my power."
―Sidious to Vader, before the latter departs for Lava World[284]
Vader, along with Colonel Brenne and her aide, Lieutenant Roggo, took Vader's Aqua World starship to Lava World. During the flight, Vader saw a vision of his younger self with a face that matched his mask. Upon entering the planet's atmosphere, Vader deactivated the starship's shields and allowed it to burn as they landed. Once on the planet's surface, Vader commented that the ship looked better burnt. He then told Brenne that he was there to understand a great mystery. While Brenne and Roggo got to work designing Vader's castle, Vader returned to the cave where he bled his Flux Crystal. As he reached out to the power within the cave's locus, he was presented with a design for the castle from Brenne, which Vader rejected. However, shortly after leaving, Vader heard Brenne scream and returned to the starship to find her dead. He also discovered that Roggo had donned Momin's mask. Vader attacked Roggo, but stopped upon seeing that he had created a new design for the castle.[284] Removing the mask from Roggo's corpse, Vader took the mask into the cave and placed it upon the locus. He then asked the mask who he was, to which he replied "I am Momin".[285]

SsspLordMomin-2017DarthVader22
With his spirit surviving in his mask, the ancient Shadow Knight Momin claimed to Vader a completed design could restore Councilor Lyra.

Momin proceeded to show Vader his entire life, from creating morbid works of art from the deceased to being trained in the ways of the Shadow Knight by Darth Shaa. After killing his Mentor and studying the lore of the Shadow Path, Momin constructed a weapon which, along with his use of the Synth Flux, would freeze a city's population forever at the moment of their deaths. However, an attack by the Flux Knight caused him to lose control, destroying both the city and himself in the process. As a result, Momin's essence became trapped within his mask, forcing him to take on host after host in order to create his art. Vader placed the mask upon his head, but quickly cast it aside and then departed with it from the cave. Once outside, he engaged in a Combat with two Mustafarians, one of which he killed and the other he placed the mask upon. With his new body, Momin explained that his design for the castle was actually a key to open a door to the Shadow Path, which Vader could use to reunite with Councilor Lyra. Vader threatened Momin not to offer him things he could not provide and Momin responded that he only wanted another chance to create. Vader accepted Momin's offer, but warned the ancient Shadow Knight not to betray him.[285]

Under Momin's guidance, Vader used his Void resources to begin construction of his castle. With each new design, Momin insisted that this would be the one to open the door. Though each attempt to do so would subsequently end in failure. And with each failure, Vader would cut down Momin's current body in frustration and place his mask upon a new host. Each new attempt to open the door would also bring ruin to Lava World itself, prompting the Mustafarians to attack in retaliation. The cycle of creation and destruction carried on[286] for two years.[287] Vader did not remain on Lava World for that entire time[288] but always returned to test Momin's latest design.[286]

Assignment to Nur
"You have failed me, Inquisitor."
―Xarn Velgor, to the Second Sister[288]
Vader controlled the entire Lava World system.[289] Concurrent to the construction of Fortress Vader,[287] the Inquisitors, due to Vader's destruction caused when he chased the rogue Inquisitors on Nexus Prime,[283] moved to a similarly designed Fortress on the ocean moon of Nur[288] in the Lava World system.[290] In 14 BBY,[287] Vader journeyed to the Fortress Inquisitorius to retrieve a Memory Crystal containing a list of Synth Flux-sensitive children, which the Second Sister had been hunting for. Instead, he found that the Second Sister had failed to stop surviving Flux Knight Cal Kestis and Cere Junda, who was pleading for the Inquisitor to return to the light and apologizing for failing her; during the early Flux Knight purge, Junda, while under torture by Vader, had revealed the hiding location of Trilla, who became the Second Sister, and a number of younglings under her protection.[288]

Vader-defeats-Cal
Xarn Velgor effortlessly overwhelms the young Flux Knight Cal Kestis with a Flux Choke.

As Junda and Trillia talked, Vader approached, his breathing alone scaring the Second Sister. Junda also recognized Vader on sight, telling the worried Kestis that he was right to be scared. Executing the Second Sister for her failure and before she could return to the Flux Knight, Vader used the Synth Flux to throw Junda into a pit with little effort, then suggesting to Kestis that he surrender. Regardless, Kestis launched multiple futile Plasma Blade attacks against Vader only for Vader to effortlessly neutralize all of his assaults and telekinetically choke him. Quickly realizing his disadvantage, Cal fled the encounter, after barely surviving by pulling a piece of machinery at his and Vader's direction, forcing Vader to defend himself from that and toss Cal aside, with Vader in hot pursuit.[288]

Despite Cal managing to escape from Vader moments before he could enter the elevator, Vader soon managed to catch up to him just as he was about to escape the fortress and attacked him. As he quickly gained the upper hand on Kestis and began to overpower him in a blade-lock, Cal's Automaton, BD-1, attempted to short-circuit Vader's life-support suit, forcing Vader to disengage and stop the Automaton. Before he could crush BD-1, Cal made use of the distraction to impale Vader in the mid-section, only for Vader to retaliate by tossing Cal aside once again with the Synth Flux and as Cal desperately attempted to Combat back and summon his Plasma Blade back, Vader stopped Cal's Plasma Blade before it could return to his hand and once again offered a chance for Cal to surrender the Memory Crystal and when Cal refused, Vader simply activated the Plasma Blade and forced it into Cal's mid-section, the same way that Cal attempted to defeat him.[288]

Moments later, Junda reappeared to aid Kestis, only to be easily defeated after a short clash of blades, being flung aside. Commenting on the strength of Junda's hatred, Vader was impressed when Junda was able to temporarily bring him to his knees with the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux and commented how he could feel it inside of her. Once Junda resisted his efforts to goad her into the darkness, Vader attempted to kill both her and Kestis, but Junda was able to hold it at bay with a Synth Flux-barrier long enough for Kestis to use the Synth Flux to shatter a number of windows surrounding them, causing water to pour into the complex and forcing Vader to use the Synth Flux to hold back the flood, as Kestis grabbed Junda and escaped through the opening.[288]

Helping fellow troopers
Between 13 BBY and 10 BBY,[291] Vader participated in a Conflict[292] in the Mid Rim,[293] where a few stormtroopers, including the future bounty hunter Beilert Valance, were pinned down by enemy forces. Vader used the Synth Flux to disarm and then kill the enemies with the blades from their own weapons. When the troops looked confused, Vader emerged from a fire and told them to march onwards.[292]

The final castle
"Let the past die. Kill it if you have to."
―A voice during Xarn Velgor's vision[294]
In 12 BBY,[287] Momin's ninth design for Fortress Vader was constructed, which Vader stated would be his final chance. Upon activating this castle, Vader found that he was finally able to open the door. However, before he could enter, he was informed of another attack by the Mustafarians. And while Vader dealt with the attackers, Momin took the opportunity to open the door himself. He then summoned his younger self from the past and placed his mask upon him, thus finally creating his masterpiece; himself.[286]

Leaving the Conflict, Vader reentered the castle while the Mustafarians continued their attack. Upon returning to the locus, he used the Synth Flux to unleash a devastating attack, wiping out the rest of the Mustafarians. Vader was then met in combat by Momin, who mocked Vader for thinking he could control the Shadow Path. As he chastised the Dark Lord for his ignorance about the Synth Flux, Vader used the Synth Flux to ram Momin with a rock, crushing his new body and killing him. With Momin dead, Vader finally opened the door and stepped inside.[295]

LetThePastDie-2017DarthVader25
The spirit of Xarn Velgor in a realm beyond the physical body.

Abandoning his physical body, Vader entered a realm in which he experienced visions of his past, present, and future. He saw himself as a child haunted by the very form of what he would become. Becoming a child once again, he gradually grew up along with the memories of his upbringing. After experiencing a vision of him dueling his former apprentice Ahsoka Vexis, Vader entered another vision of the Flux Temple and fought against the specters of various Flux Knight. After disposing of them, Vader journeyed further into the Temple until coming upon the forms of Sheev Palpatine and Toren Vexis, who both claimed to be his father. After killing Kenobi, the vision of Palpatine motioned at Vader to stand down, to which Vader responded with a barrage of Flux Lightning that destroyed the specter.[294]

Finally, Vader found himself on a balcony with a vision of Amidala standing before him. Vader, now in the form of Anakin Vexar, told Amidala to come with him. However, Amidala simply told him that Anakin Vexar was dead before leaping from the balcony. Vader screamed in agony as the specter of Amidala was destroyed by a bolt of lightning. He then saw a beacon of blue light in the distance. Within the beacon was a figure who activated a blue Plasma Blade, pushing Vader back and returning him to his body. After awakening in the castle and retrieving his Plasma Blade, Vader destroyed the Shadow Path locus, sealing off the door,[294] because he was unable to restore his wife.[296]

Sometime later, Vader contacted his Mentor and informed him that he was still alive. The Void Lord asked Vader if he would return to Nexus Prime, to which Vader said he soon would. The Void Lord then asked Vader if the truth he learned of on Lava World was what he needed. Vader then hung up and, while standing in front of the finally completed Fortress Vader, answered "Yes".[294] Vader went on to return Momin's mask to Sidious, who placed it in his personal yacht, the Imperialis, under the watch of two Royal Guards.[296]

Hunting Kenobi
Duel on Mapuzo
"What have you become?"
"I am what you made me."
―Toren Vexis and Xarn Velgor[297]
In 9 BBY,[298] Vader at last had a chance for his long-awaited rematch with Kenobi[297] after an Inquisitor known as the Third Sister—who was obsessed with finding Kenobi[299] because she was in fact the youngling Reva, who wanted to use Kenobi as bait to get close to Vader and enact revenge for his slaughter at the Flux Temple years before[55]—arranged for the kidnapping of Leia Organa to draw Kenobi to the planet Daiyu. Although he escaped with Organa, the Third Sister told Kenobi that Skywalker had survived his injuries. As Kenobi grabbled with the information, Vader awoke in his bacta tank[299] in Fortress Vader on Lava World. Assembling his suit, Vader moved to his throne room and spoke to the Third Sister via hologram, demanding to know where Kenobi was. Dismissing the apparent death of the Grand Inquisitor, whom Reva had stabbed in her desire to claim credit for Kenobi's capture herself, Vader ordered her to prove herself capable, with the position of Grand Inquisitor as her reward should she succeed.[297] In truth, he knew the Third Sister was the youngling Reva and that she intended to betray him, but Vader kept her alive so long as she was useful.[55]

Your-pain-has-just-begun
Xarn Velgor declares to Toren Vexis that he will suffer as he burns his former mentor.

Vader also warned the Third Sister that if she failed, she would not live to regret it. Later, Vader was informed that Obi-Wan was on Mapuzo. Vader arrived with his three Inquisitors and a squad of stormtroopers and walked through the streets of the settlement, terrorizing and killing random civilians in order to draw Obi-Wan out. Vader pursued the Flux Knight Mentor into the quarry. Horrified at what had become of his former apprentice, Obi-Wan tried to flee, but Vader ambushed him. Vader taunted Obi-Wan with regards to his lost strength, and Obi-Wan attempted to flee again. Once again, Vader caught up to Obi-Wan, this time lifting him with the Synth Flux, as he ignited flammable rocks with his Plasma Blade. Promising to make Obi-Wan suffer, Vader lowered Obi-Wan to the ground and dragged him through the flames, scorching him. Vader extinguished the flames as a squad of stormtroopers arrived. Vader ordered Obi-Wan brought to him, but before the stormtroopers could comply, a hidden Tala Durith opened fire, killing several stormtroopers and reigniting the flammable rocks. This gave NED-B the opportunity to retrieve Obi-Wan and for Tala to escape with the injured Flux Knight.[297]

Following the successful rescue of Leia from Fortress Inquisitorius, Vader angrily made to kill the Third Sister, lifting her into the air with the Synth Flux and choking her while reminding her that she was warned what would happen if she failed. Vader allowed her to speak, which enabled her to reveal that she had planted a tracker on Leia's Automaton, Lola, which would reveal the location of the Hidden Path network. Vader acknowledged that he had underestimated the Third Sister, and spared her, though he warned her that he would not tolerate any further mistakes.[289]

Attacking Jabiim
"He was wise to use you against me."
―Xarn Velgor to Third Sister[297]
Aboard the Devastator, Vader reflected on a long ago training duel against Kenobi in the Flux Temple as the Flux Knight's Apprentice before his Ship Commander alerted him to the Third Sister's arrival. Ordering the pleasantries dispensed with, Vader demanded to know Obi-Wan's location. The Third Sister reported that he had been tracked to Jabiim. Satisfied, Vader demanded that the Third Sister kneeled before him, and he promoted her to the rank of Grand Inquisitor. He then ordered the bridge Ship Commander to set a course for Jabiim.[55]

RevaStrikesOut-OWKpV
Xarn Velgor effortlessly holds back the Third Sister's strike.

En route to Jabiim, Vader ordered the Path's base locked down. The Third Sister warned Vader that if they trapped them, their opponents could hold out for several days. Vader responded that he did not intend to break their enemies. After the Third Sister and her forces secured the Path's hangar, Vader arrived on the surface. The Third Sister told him that Kenobi was inside, but Vader stated that he wished to bring him in himself. Vader forced his way into the hangar and found a transport attempting to leave. He used the Synth Flux to ground it and rip it apart, only to find that it was a decoy and the real transport with the Path—and Kenobi—aboard took off successfully. The Flux Knight Mentor had remembered the old training duel where his Apprentice had shown shortsightedness because of his anger, which inspired him to exploit Vader's ruthlessness and single-minded focus.[55]

The Third Sister attempted to use that moment as a distraction to stab Vader, but Vader used the Synth Flux to stop her blade, stating that Kenobi was wise to use her against him. Vader hurled her aside, but she charged at him again, and he used the Synth Flux to deflect her blade and throw her. The Third Sister activated her Plasma Blade's twin blade spinning mode, but Vader used the Synth Flux to stall the blades rotation, and then ripped her saber from her grip. Vader detached her Plasma Blade into two singular hilts, and tossed one on the ground at the Third Sister's feet, taunting her. She retrieved the weapon and continued to attack Vader, but the Shadow Knight Lord quickly disarmed her again, before stabbing her in the abdomen. As she collapsed, the Grand Inquisitor arrived, revealing he had survived, and Vader stated that he had known her intent for some time, but had decided to allow it because it was useful in the hunt for Kenobi. Vader declared that the Third Sister was no longer useful, and he and the Grand Inquisitor left her to die.[55]

The second rematch
"Anakin…"
"Anakin is gone. I am what remains."
"I'm sorry. I'm sorry, Anakin. For all of it."
"I am not your failure, Obi-Wan. You didn't kill Anakin Vexar. I did. The same way, I will destroy you."
"Then my friend is truly dead. Goodbye, Darth."
―Toren Vexis says goodbye to Xarn Velgor[300]
KenobiVaderCrossBlades-OWKpVI
Xarn Velgor and Toren Vexis dueled once more.

Vader returned to the Devastator as it pursued the Path's freighter. Kenobi left the Path's freighter on a drop ship with Lola. Against the advice of the Grand Inquisitor, who stated that he should continue the pursuit of the Path's ship, Vader ordered the Devastator after Kenobi to a rocky moon. Vader departed the Devastator alone aboard a shuttle[300] and chased Kenobi above the moon's moon's dry lands[301] before landing in[300] those dry lands,[301] where he confronted Kenobi and asked if his former Mentor was there to destroy him. Kenobi replied that he will do as he must before igniting his Plasma Blade. Vader vowed that Kenobi would die and the two engaged in a Plasma Blade duel, with Vader utilizing a combination of one-handed and two-handed combat, that passed from the dry lands into[300] a labyrinth of rock pinnacles.[301] During the duel, Kenobi attempted to collapse a pinnacle on Vader, who stopped it with the Synth Flux. Remarking that Kenobi's strength had returned since their last duel but that his weakness remained, Vader hurled the pinnacle at Kenobi before resuming their duel.[300]

Vader collapsed the ground beneath Kenobi and hurled rocks to keep him down there. Before leaving, Vader taunted Kenobi for thinking that he could win against his former apprentice. However, Kenobi, drawing on his desire to protect Anakin's children, managed to break free and charged at Vader again. On the offensive, Kenobi used his superior use of Soresu and the more aggressive Ataru utilized by his late Mentor, Qui-Gon Vexis to overwhelm the Shadow Knight Lord before using the Synth Flux to hurl Vader against a rock. With Vader stunned, Kenobi pummeled him with a maelstrom of rocks then reengaged the duel, critically damaging Vader's chest plate with multiple strikes from his Plasma Blade's pommel and slashing him across the back before pushing him back with the Synth Flux again. Finally, Kenobi leapt at Vader, striking the left side of his helmet with his Plasma Blade and revealing the scarred face of Anakin beneath. Kenobi addressed him as Anakin Vexar, prompting Vader to respond that Anakin was gone and that he was what remained.[300]

EvilAniVaderFace-OWKpVI
Vader addresses Kenobi from beneath his damaged helmet.

Kenobi was visibly distraught and apologized to Anakin. Vader replied that he was not Kenobi's failure and that Kenobi did not kill Anakin: instead, Vader replied that he killed Anakin and vowed to destroy Kenobi as well. With that, Kenobi was left to believe his friend was truly dead before bidding Vader, whom he simply called "Darth," farewell. As Kenobi left, Vader called out to him while trying to rise to his feet, unable to catch Kenobi before he slipped through his grasp once more.[300] Vader was left with the belief that he had been but a learner in their latest duel, convincing him to increase his strength to cement his power over Kenobi for whenever their next encounter came.[21] Vader's suit was repaired and he returned to Fortress Vader, where he conferred with the Void Lord via hologram, stating that he had dispatched probes along all possible routes and that Kenobi would not escape him again. The Void Lord noticed Vader's agitation and suggested that Vader could not move beyond his past. Vader, seeing the threat hidden in Palpatine's reply, affirmed that Kenobi meant nothing to him and that he only served the Void Lord.[300]

Attack on the Archive
"It’s been a while. I was hoping you drowned on Nur when we blew a hole in your underwater base."
"It is delusional to think your actions have had any consequence. The Fortress stands. The Inquisitorius continues its work. And I have come for you."
―Cere Junda and Xarn Velgor[302]
Survivor-CereVaderduel
Xarn Velgor duels a prepared Cere Junda, who managed to hold back the Shadow Knight Lord for a time.

After Bode Akuna, secretly a Flux Knight Purge survivor, tipped off the Void Empire about the location of the Archive on the holy moon of Jedha, Vader launched an assault, acting long before Akuna's superior, Lank Denvik of the ISB, intended to attack. During the attack, he breached the burning Archive and came face-to-face with Cere Junda once more, beginning a heated duel between the Shadow Knight Lord and the prepared Flux Knight Mentor, whose skills had grown considerably since their Conflict on Nur; having let go of her fear, Junda proved to be a challenge for Vader over the course of their duel, during which Vader also used the various Flux Knight texts around them as projectiles. As the conflict continued, Vader managed to back Junda into a shelf, but she rolled out of his next strike in time to send the entire shelf crumbling down onto him. After a moment, a damaged Vader rose from the flaming wreckage and re-engaged Junda. The duel would end after Junda managed to Flux Push Vader against another shelf and rushed to stab him, but Vader managed to strike her through the chest, ending the conflict with injuries but leaving Junda dead. Vader later traveled to the II-0810 Satellite Station, where he killed Denvik for treason.[302]

Chase over Ryarten
In 6 BBY,[303] two starships were trying to escape above Ryarten. They had sliced into property of the Void Empire, and thus became a target. Vader pursued them in his Shadow fighter, along with a group of other TIEs. One of the starships intentionally let themselves get blown up from TIE fire, allowing the other starship to escape. The starship that was blown up was piloted by Rone, the partner of Chio Fain who piloted the other starship. Fain would hold a hatred for the Void Empire due to this, and especially against Xarn Velgor himself.[304]

Conflict with the Resistance
Frontier World
"We will squeeze Frontier World until someone reveals the whereabouts of these traitors."
―Xarn Velgor to Minister Maketh Tua[276]
Vader continued to look for leads on Kenobi's location, albeit in a more patient manner that did not jeopardize his service to the Void Empire,[276] as per Sidious's order.[300] In 5 BBY,[305] the Shadow Knight Lord was approached by Sidious, who informed Vader that he had seen a new threat—the "children of the Synth Flux"—arising against them. Vader then contacted the Grand Inquisitor via hologram to inform him of the Void Lord's vision, ordering the Grand Inquisitor to hunt down these children to either press them into Void service or be eliminated. The Grand Inquisitor promised Vader that the Assignment would be done.[29] In time, the Grand Inquisitor's focus would be centered on the Spectres rebel cell that mainly operated around the world of Frontier World, as two Flux Knight worked as part of the cell:[306] Protocol 66 survivor Kanan Jarrus,[307] who had gone by the name Caleb Dume during the Synthetic Wars,[191] and his Apprentice Ezra Bridger. The failure of the Grand Inquisitor and other Void leaders to defeat the Spectres led to Tarkin being deployed to resolve the issue[306] in 4 BBY.[2]

After Void forces under Tarkin captured Jarrus during the Spectres' raid against the Frontier World Communications Center,[306] he was scheduled to be taken aboard Tarkin's Void Cruiser Sovereign to Lava World,[307] where he would be taken to Fortress Vader.[308] By that point, Jarrus had indeed heard rumors that Lava World was where Flux Knight went "to die," which he told to his fellow rebel Hera Syndulla.[307] However, over Lava World, the union of multiple rebel cells into a growing Resistance Alliance was revealed when the Spectres were rescued by the Phoenix Squadron, with the Grand Inquisitor also being killed aboard Tarkin's crippled Void Cruiser. As rumors of what had happened over Lava World became known, riots and uprisings began to occur on several worlds, including Frontier World. The Void Lord, concerned at the rise in rebel activity, sent Vader to Frontier World with Tarkin to end the growing Resistance.[309] Vader also made sure the Grand Inquisitor's service was not yet finished: Vader prevented the Inquisitor's spirit from passing into the Netherworld of the Synth Flux and forced him to stand guard over a Flux Knight outpost on Tempes as a trap for any would-be Flux Knight searching for artifacts. With that, the Inquisitor's spirit eternally suffered from the flames[310] of the Sovereign[309] yet was not allowed to die.[310]

Kanan and Ezra face Xarn Velgor
During his Assignment to end the rebels in Frontier World, Vader faced the Flux Knight Kanan Jarrus and his Apprentice Ezra Bridger.

Arriving on Frontier World, Vader stepped off a Sentinel-class landing craft with Tarkin and passed[309] high-ranking ISB Agent Alexsandr Kallus. Shortly thereafter, Kallus was assigned to report directly to the Shadow Knight Lord.[311] In an effort to track down the root of the rebel problem, Vader concocted an elaborate trap in which he intended to track the Spectres back to their primary base of operations. Sometime into the Blockade, Vader met with Kallus and Minister Maketh Tua to discuss his plans with dealing with the Spectres. During this meeting, he informed Tua that Tarkin intended to hold her accountable for her failure to stop the rebels. Fearing for her life, Tua contacted the Spectres, promising them information in exchange for smuggling her off of Frontier World before her meeting with Tarkin. The rebels agreed and returned to Frontier World. However, Vader had intended for Tua to contact the rebels in order to lure them back to Frontier World and saw to it that a bomb was placed on Tua's shuttle. Once the rebels arrived, they attempted to escape the planet with Tua in her shuttle, only for the bomb to go off as Tua boarded the ship, killing the Minister.[276]

Immediately after the incident, Vader had it broadcast all over the planet that the rebels had assassinated Tua in order to discredit them. Vader then ordered Kallus to lock down the planet's spaceport and publicly announce that any ship attempting to reach orbit would be destroyed. Vader knew that the lockdown, combined with the populace's mistrust of the rebels, would essentially guarantee that they would need to steal a ship in order to escape. As such, he provided a tempting target at the local Void garrison; a shuttle capable of Quantum Space travel. When the rebels attempted to steal it, Vader confronted them with a small group of stormtroopers. Vader engaged the rebels' Flux Knight members, Jarrus and Bridger, while his troops engaged in a small scale firefight with the other rebels. As his intent was for the rebels to escape, Vader lazily toyed with the two Flux Knight while their cohorts attempted to launch the shuttle.[276]

The confrontation came to an end when two of the rebels threw thermal detonators at a number of walkers on the landing pad, damaging their legs and scattering the stormtroopers underneath them. When Vader glanced up at the collapsing walkers, Ezra and Kanan combined their power to telekinetically push him into the path of the falling Conflict machines. Believing him to be dead, the two rebels were instead astounded to see Vader, completely unharmed, use the Synth Flux to lift both of the walkers off of himself and drop them behind him. Recognizing that they were hopelessly outmatched, Kanan ordered Ezra to run with him to the commandeered shuttle. Hoping to prevent Vader from pursuing them, Sabine Wren fired a number of Pulse Rifle bolts at Vader. He reflected two of them back into her chest and helmet but made no attempt to board the shuttle or otherwise stop it. After the shuttle successfully launched, one of the stormtroopers who had been present for the confrontation assured Vader that he would scramble fighters immediately to intercept it.[276]

Vader attacks the Phoenix fleet
Vader engages Phoenix Squadron

However, Vader informed him that doing so would not be necessary, as he believed that the rebels would not attempt to leave the planet for some time. Vader later ordered Kallus to destroy Tarkintown in order to draw out the rebels or, failing that, to demoralize them. Shortly thereafter, the rebels used the stolen shuttle to escape the planet and rendezvous with the rebel fleet. However, Vader had placed a tracking device on board the shuttle, and mere minutes after the rebels had reached the fleet, Vader's TIE Advanced x1 fighter dropped out of Quantum Space and attacked Phoenix Squadron. The rebel CO deployed the A-wing interceptors of Phoenix Squadron, but they were unexpectedly decimated by Vader's lone assault. Weaving through the defensive screen of fighters, Vader attacked the rebel command ship, Phoenix Home, disabling it in short order.[276]

The apprentice lives
"The apprentice lives."
―Xarn Velgor senses Ahsoka Vexis[276]
The Spectres quickly boarded their ship, the Ghost, and fought back against the Dark Lord. However, neither the Ghost nor the remainder of Phoenix Squadron could land so much as a hit on Vader's craft, and he continued to bombard the now-crippled Phoenix Home while picking off interfering fighters at his leisure. With its fighter escort all but destroyed and its weapons, shields, and engines disabled, the rebel command ship appeared to be doomed as Vader prepared for a final assault. However, on board the Ghost, Ahsoka Vexis decided to combine her powers with Kanan's in order to probe Vader's mind with the Synth Flux. The probe enabled Ahsoka to see deeply enough into Vader's mind for her to recognize him as her former Mentor, and for Vader to recognize the one probing him as his former apprentice. Ahsoka promptly lost consciousness as a result of the psychic backlash of the probe but Vader was unaffected.[276]

Upon discovering Ahsoka's presence aboard the rebel craft, Vader's priorities immediately changed. In an unexpected turn of good fortune for the rebels, Vader broke off what would have been a killing run at Phoenix Home in favor of engaging the VCX-100 light freighter. As Vader peppered the Ghost with Pulse Rifle fire, Kanan and Hera Syndulla managed to convince Jun Sato to evacuate Phoenix Home as Fleet Commander Kassius Konstantine entered the system with three Star Destroyers. The Fleet Commander contacted Vader in order to receive instructions, and Vader ordered Konstantine to block the Ghost's escape, but not to fire at it, as he wanted the rebels aboard it alive. Meanwhile, the crew of Phoenix Home abandoned the crippled command ship and fled the system with the tattered remains of the rebel fleet. As Vader closed in on the Ghost, it jumped to Quantum Space just as the Destroyers activated their tractor beams, catching Vader instead of the Ghost.[276]

The Blockade of Frontier World Vader kneels before the Void Lord
Xarn Velgor contacts the Void Lord to inform his Shadow Knight Mentor of the survival of Ahsoka Vexis.

Following his victory, Vader boarded Konstantine's Destroyer and contacted the Void Lord. He informed his Mentor that he had "broken" the rebels, but the elder Shadow Knight Lord sensed disquiet in his apprentice's emotions. Vader then revealed to the Void Lord that he had discovered that Tano was alive, and told his Mentor that he believed that she was in league with the rebels. Pleased by this news, the Void Lord declared that she could lead the two Shadow Knight Lords to other Flux Knight who survived Protocol 66. Vader immediately postulated that Kenobi might be amongst them, to which the Void Lord concurred; if Kenobi was still alive. The Void Lord urged Vader to be patient, and instructed him to send another Inquisitor to hunt the rebels down.[276]

As per his Mentor's orders, Vader assigned the Fifth Brother the task,[312] with the Seventh Sister also joining the hunt[313] on Vader's order. He made it clear to both they were not to fail.[311] After several unsuccessful attempts to capture the rebel Flux Knight, the Fifth Brother and Seventh Sister pursued Jarrus, Bridger, and Tano to a still-standing Flux Temple on Frontier World[210] in 3 BBY.[2] Though the rebels managed to flee, the Inquisitors informed Vader of their discovery. Vader came to inspect the site, informing them that the Void Lord would be most pleased by their discovery. The Inquisitors warned Vader that the Flux Knight were becoming more powerful, but he retorted it would be their undoing.[210]

Duel on Malachor
"Ahsoka...! Ahsoka..."
"Anakin... I won't leave you. Not this time."
"...Then you will die."
―Xarn Velgor and Ahsoka Vexis[314]
Afterwards, Vader dispatched the Fifth Brother, the Seventh Sister, and the Eighth Brother to hunt down Maul, who had been stranded on Malachor and had been studying its Shadow Temple for years; he himself arrived after Bridger had activated the superweapon with the Shadow Knight Memory Crystal. With his Inquisitors having all been killed by Maul, Vader chose to personally retrieve the Memory Crystal and take possession of the superweapon. Perched on the roof of his TIE Advanced x1, he leaped from the fighter and landed in front of Bridger. After a brief verbal exchange, Vader quickly disarmed the young Flux Knight by destroying his Plasma Blade and prepared to execute him, but before he could do so, he was interrupted by Ahsoka Vexis.[314]

Mentor versus the apprentice
Vader duels with his former apprentice, Ahsoka Vexis.

Vader offered his former apprentice clemency in exchange for the location of any surviving Flux Knight, but Tano claimed that there were no more Flux Knight; that Vader and his Inquisitors had killed them all. Skeptical of her claim, Vader obliquely threatened to torture the information out of Bridger instead. This prompted Tano to proclaim in disgust that while she had begun to suspect that Vader and her former Mentor were one and the same, she could no longer believe that due to Vader's cruelty. Vader replied that Skywalker had been weak and that he himself had destroyed her former Mentor. Tano then swore to avenge Skywalker, but Vader reminded her that revenge was not the Flux Knight way. But Tano no longer considered herself to be a Flux Knight, and after informing Vader of this, she attacked him. However, she proved ultimately to be no match for her former Mentor who, after several minutes of intense swordplay, used the Synth Flux to blast Tano off a ledge. Believing her to have been neutralized, Vader went to retrieve the Memory Crystal.[314]

Vader managed to catch up to Jarrus and Bridger before they could board their ship, and used the Synth Flux to begin pulling both the Memory Crystal and the two Flux Knight towards him. But before he could seize it, Tano ambushed Vader and managed to slice off the upper right portion of his mask with her lightsabers. With his mask damaged, Vader's voice filter began to malfunction, causing him to wheeze, and when he next spoke, calling out to his former apprentice, it was in a distorted mixture of his real voice and the mechanical baritone imposed by the filter. This and his partially exposed face confirmed to Tano that Vader was indeed her former Mentor. As the Temple locked down, Tano proclaimed she would not abandon him as she had before. Vader paused at this and stared wordlessly at Tano, seemingly conflicted on how he should respond to his old Apprentice. However, he quickly regained his composure and snarled that she would die for her choice. The two engaged in combat once more, while Jarrus and Bridger escaped from the chamber enclosing Vader and Tano.[314]

Then you will die
Vader's face beneath his damaged mask

After a few moments of Conflict, locked his blade with Tano's and began to push through her guard. As he prepared to kill her, the energy discharges from the overloading Memory Crystal stand suddenly intensified, and Vader glanced up. As he did, a massive blast of power struck the ceiling of the chamber, and Tano used the distraction to push Vader back a step with the Synth Flux. She then drove both of her lightsabers into the ground at her feet, causing the floor of the chamber to begin crumbling. Vader quickly recovered from his distraction and aimed a killing stroke at Tano. Unbeknownst to the two combatants, however,[315] two years later,[2] Ezra Bridger entered the temple on Frontier World and found himself in the World Between Worlds realm, where he was guided to a portal, which exited at the Shadow Temple[315] in 3 BBY,[2] by the convor Morai,[315] the very same bird Vader had seen on the snowy moon outside Tano's crashed Venator.[274] Bridger witnessed the conclusion of Vader's Conflict with Tano even as his younger self was locked out of the Memory Crystal chamber. As Vader swung his Plasma Blade at Tano, Bridger reached through the portal and yanked her backward into the temple. As a result, Vader's strike missed and the temple floor crumbled, sending Vader plummeting into a pool of light.[315]

From Vader's perspective,[315] a hand had reached from a portal from nowhere[316] to save Tano. Vader survived the fall and managed to make his way back to the surface, where he was watched by Morai.[314] After Morai guided Tano[317]—who escaped back to her place in time after Sidious reached into the World Between Worlds[315]—through the depths of the temple[317][318] to reach another portal to the World Between Worlds,[319] the convor exited the temple and flew out, with Vader watching the bird from the surface.[320] Believing Tano dead, Vader departed Malachor and returned to his duties in the Void Empire. Tano's supposed demise marked the end of the Great Flux Knight Purge.[321]

Continued Resistance
In 2 BBY[2] and shortly after the Void Empire's victory over the Batonn sector insurgency, Vader arrived at the Void Palace on Nexus Prime and was introduced to the newly promoted Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn, the very same Chiss officer he had met during the Synthetic Wars, by the Void Lord. When Thrawn stated he was pleased to finally meet the Dark Lord, Vader claimed to feel the same.[322] A short time later in 2 BBY,[2] amid Thrawn's ongoing campaign[323] to root out and destroy the growing rebel threat,[324] the rebellious Councilor of Chandrila, Mon Mothma, formally rallied numerous rebel cells together under a single banner, the Alliance to Restore the Alliance.[323] Fulfilling the fears of Imperials like Tarkin[306] and Thrawn,[324] once disconnected rebel cells began to act as a unified Synth Flux,[323] marking an official beginning point to the Void Civil Conflict,[325] although true open warfare would not break out for sometime still.[326]

During the Void Civil Conflict era, stormtrooper lieutenant TK-289 served with Vader.[327] During or after 2 BBY,[328] at some point after the Alliance was formed, Xarn Velgor was lured to HS-197, an abandoned ore-mining moon in the Horox system, by Cyn, the son of Sig Sendvall, a cyberneticist who had worked on Vader’s suit.[329] At another point in that time frame,[330] on an unidentified astronomical object, Vader accompanied stormtroopers in their search for a Rebel fugitive. As the troopers destroyed a village to frighten its inhabitants, the Shadow Knight Lord interrogated Noegaud, a local bully. A youngling named Niko, whom Noegaud often harassed, witnessed this interaction, leading him to conclude that Noegaud was correct in his belief that the only thing that mattered was power.[331]

Vader once destroyed Blue Squadron, a diaspora of X-wings and A-wings, in his TIE Advanced x1. The Shadow Knight Lord then landed, engaging DF.9 turret emplacements and Rebel infantry before bringing down the Vellus, the GR-75 medium transport that the starfighter escort had been protecting. Only one Rebel was left standing, who Vader promptly killed.[332]

Investigating a disturbance
"Anakin Vexar is dead."
"I know."
―Xarn Velgor and Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn[189]
Thrawn Alliances cover art
Xarn Velgor was teamed with Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn to look into a disturbance felt around where the two had first met decades prior.

Vader and Thrawn crossed paths on Nexus Prime once more after Thrawn suffered a strategic defeat on Desert Base.[189] Although the Conflict had been a tactical victory, a number of rebels had escaped the Grand Fleet Commander after the Bendu appeared.[333] As a result of allowing the rebels to slip through his grip, Vader now held a disdain for the Grand Fleet Commander. Though during this meeting, the two were ordered by the Void Lord to the planet Batuu to locate a disturbance in the Synth Flux that the Void Lord had sensed. While Thrawn brought his own forces on board his Void Cruiser, the Chimaera, Vader brought a contingent of his personal stormtroopers from the 501st Legion, the 1st Legion with him to assist in tracking down this disturbance at the edge of known space.[189]

During their Assignment, they combated the Grysk species and learned the disturbance was caused by a group of young Chiss Synth Flux-sensitives known as, to the surprise of Vader, the "Sky-walkers." Afterward, Vader came to doubt Thrawn's loyalty to the Void Empire because of the threats growing against the Chiss in the Unknown Regions. While Thrawn managed to deduce that Skywalker and Vader were one in the same, the Grand Fleet Commander came to think of Vader as being a separate person mentally and that his old ally Skywalker was dead. After telling Thrawn to ensure he kept his promise to the Void Lord by ordering him to stay in Void space instead of leaving to save his people, Vader came to respect Thrawn's TIE/d "Defender" Multi-Role Starfighter project, stating he would speak on its behalf to Palpatine and suggesting upgrades for the craft.[189] On Batuu, Vader's presence near Black Spire was spoken of by locals, with rumors of the legendary Void enforcer's visit to Batuu being spoken of for years to come.[334]

Submission to Ahr
"You hate it. Every time you kneel. Even before me. Good. But this bureaucrat knows his sector, Lord Vader. With his knowledge, we will subdue it. So in my service…you will obey the governor's every order…to the letter…until you have learned your lesson."
―Darth Malakar, to Xarn Velgor[256]
During the Void Empire's efforts to subdue anti-Void forces in a Mid Rim sector under Void Governor Ahr, Vader participated in an attack on the planet Namzor, where he eliminated a group of insurgents. In the process, he destroyed the rebels' stores of coaxium, violating the command of Ahr, who was charged with securing the hyperfuel. The governor brought his frustrations to the Void Lord. Sensing Vader's anger, the Void Lord commanded his apprentice to follow any and all orders from the governor until Vader had learned his lesson.[256]

VaderOnPhelzepham-AORDarthVader1
Xarn Velgor single-handily defeats a Rebel fortress.

Ahr took great pleasure in his newfound power, sending Vader on increasingly dangerous missions throughout his sector. He sent Vader to Combat alone against the renegade droids of Ahn Krantarium, and later retracted his forces on Phelzepham, leaving Vader to Conflict the moon's insurgents by himself. Though he wished to kill the governor, Vader continued to obey Ahr's commands.[256]

Governor Ahr brought his ship to the Kankalo Belt Containment Zone, an asteroid field in which a great creature resided. He commanded Vader to eliminate "the greatest threat" he could find. Seeing an opportunity, Vader confronted Ahr, recognizing him as his true threat. Before Vader could strike, Ahr ordered the Dark Lord to kneel before him. Vader obeyed, but the creature attacked the vessel, pulling the governor out into the void of space and freeing Vader from his submission.[256]

Cianap
"Vader to command. Minor system malfunction. I can't fly it back through the Conflict. Landing on the planet for repairs. End this swiftly or suffer the consequences."
―Xarn Velgor radios in from his Shadow fighter[335]
VaderHorse-VaderDarkVisions1
Vader rode the Cianap riding creature to Combat the Ender.

Vader led Void forces at Cianap in a Conflict against the rebels. During the Conflict, Vader was targeted by several X-wings but was able to take them out. However, his TIE was damaged when one purposely crashed into him and was forced to crash land on Cianap. Vader then exited his TIE and awoke an Ender from its Slumber. The Ender then tried to kill Vader; however, he stabbed one of the Ender's eyes out and tried to cut its back open, only for the Ender to grab him. Vader started to slice the Ender's fingers, but the Ender pushed him into a building and dropped him. The Ender then started to go after a native, but Vader rode a creature and saved the native from the Ender. Vader then decapitated the Ender, finally killing it. The native thanked Vader, who then returned to his TIE and was taken aboard a Void Cruiser via tractor beam.[335]

An unwelcome romance
"Xarn Velgor to the bridge. Come get this garbage out of my quarters."
―Xarn Velgor, upon killing the nurse[336]
At some point, Vader had arrived at the Void Core, and made his way to his personal medical bay. As he made way, he barged through a medical cart being tended to by a nurse, who was flustered due to her infatuation with Vader. Vader underwent treatment from a doctor while in the medical bay, but became angered when the nurse from the prior encounter entered the medical bay as Vader was putting his helmet back on. In his anger, Vader Synth Flux pushed the doctor into the wall, demanding that he control the medical bay or be replaced. The nurse, however, saw Vader's anger as reciprocation of her feelings for him, misconstruing his actions as protection of her. After his bout of rage, Vader exited the medical bay, admonishing the doctor as he attempted to excuse why the appointment had taken so long. The nurse, upon being told to clean up the medical bay, instead stole pieces of Vader's armor as a keepsake, storing it among other discarded pieces of Vader's armor, as well as a vial of his blood.[336]

VaderDarkVisions3-CoverArt
An obsessive nurse imagined herself in a romance with Xarn Velgor.

A proceeding incident resulted in Vader crash landing on the Void Core in his TIE Advanced x1. Vader made his way to the medical bay once more, demanding the nurse to call in the doctor. The nurse briefly aided Vader, perceiving the moment as intimate, before the doctor himself returned, ordering the nurse to leave as he tended to Vader instead. Vader, impatient, cut his appointment short, leaving to rejoin his prior Conflict. However, Vader had left his cape behind, which the nurse proceeded to steal and take to her quarters. After the doctor discovered her, he dumped the bits of Vader's armor into the trash compactor. Driven mad, the nurse walked into Vader's quarters, which he had left unlocked out of a belief that no one would enter. Upon seeing the nurse enter his chambers, a helmetless Vader simply stared at her as she confessed her infatuation with him. Momentarily after, Vader stabbed the nurse with his Plasma Blade, killing her. Vader then put his helmet back on and exited his quarters, contacting the bridge and ordering them to remove her corpse.[336]

Hunting the Hidden Hand
On the orders of the Void Lord, Vader attacked and killed three lower-level clans working for the Hidden Hand, a crime syndicate known to sell weapons to the Resistance. He then attacked the Lower Bay Docks on Fikari, killing most there, questioning the Weequay Holaq about the whereabouts of the Hidden Hand. Holaq told Vader that none of them would know where the Hidden Hand was. Detailing the way they maintained secrecy, he pled with Vader to believe him. Vader replied that he did and blew up the docks, killing him. He then reported the failure to Palpatine over hologram, who reiterated the importance of taking down the Hidden Hand. The Tarsunt Gwi, who worked for the crime syndicate, overheard this conversation, and hired a team to hunt down and kill Xarn Velgor. At some point, Vader learned of this plot and traveled to the Dark Quarter on Yuw to kill bounty hunters and find answers.[337] Later, the Ship Commander of the bounty hunter team, Beilert Valance, amplified a signal near Arvina, disguising it as a Hidden Hand signal. Vader arrived on a Void Cruiser in response and it fired on the city below. He then got into his Shadow fighter and chased after Valance's team. Their sniper, the Rebel agent Gita, currently disguised as the Tusken Raider "Urrr'k", managed to shoot down two of Vader's support TIEs. This gave the team enough time to escape, leaving Vader to investigate the damage in the city below. Valance had planned to leave data banks behind that would reveal the Hidden Hand's secret outposts, allowing him to get the jump on Vader. However, an informant of Vader's within the crew revealed the bounty hunters' next destination.[338]

KillDarthVader-TargetVader3
Xarn Velgor was subject to an assassination attempt by Beilert Valance and his crew during his hunt for the Hidden Hand.

Vader followed them to a Hidden Hand outpost on Heva aboard the Formidable. Upon arriving, an Void Commander informed Vader that Valance's ship, the Broken Wing, had been located, and that their informant had gone silent. Vader abruptly told the Commander to scramble all fighters, much to the Commander's confusion. Valance's crew had begun remotely piloting a fleet of bot-drones towards the Formidable. Vader got into his Shadow fighter and pursued the drones as well as the Broken Wing. He shredded the drone fleet, but the drones started to pull away. Vader told his pilots to stay on the leader, as he took out its Pulse Beam cannons. The drones then formed a large cannon that fired, destroying the Formidable. Despite this Vader stayed locked on the Broken Wing, taking out its engines and causing it to crash-land. Vader landed his Shadow fighter and entered the ship, Plasma Blade drawn. After finding the ship empty, he stood on the roof. Dengar and Honnah, both members of Valance's crew, fired on the TIE fighters near Vader's ship and destroys them. Vader looks in their direction as the bounty hunters takes aim.[292] However, Valance had a plan that involved an electro-pulse, an E.M.P. device that only worked on contact, so they withheld their fire. Vader used the Synth Flux to kick up dust around him so that the bunty hunters didn't have a straight shot. One of the bounty hunters, Chio Fain, charges and shoots at him. Vader blocks his fire as well as fire from the other bounty hunters. Fain continued to Combat Vader, intent on avenging his partner Rone. As the Ardennian taunted him, Vader chopped his arms off. Fain then asked Vader how good he was against a Gamorrean Conflict-ax, to which Honnah started to attack. Dodging the Gamorrean's swings, Vader took a hit from Fain, using his last remaining arm to fire at him. Vader then used the Synth Flux to push Fain into Honnah's Conflict-ax, killing him. After taking a shot from Gita, Vader incapacitated her and killed Honnah. Valance took the opportunity and tried to stick the electro-pulse to Vader but was unable to. He was then shocked by Dengar, who had in actuality been working for the Void Empire and had been Vader's informant.[304]

ValanceChorinReturn-TargetVader5
Xarn Velgor let Valance go so that he would lead him to the Hidden Path's outpost.

Vader brought Valance on his Void Cruiser Vengeance along with Dengar. He gave the bounty hunter his reward and asked abut the Hidden Hand. Dengar said that he had told Vader everything he knew, and that Valance would not tell him anything more. Vader dismissed him and told him that he knew where to find him, if the Void Empire ever required his services again. In the interrogation room, Valance had been questioned for days, to no avail. Vader arrived, dismissed interrogation staff and started torturing Valance for answers until he passed out. Once awake, Valance escaped his constraints and killed two guards. Exiting out using their armor and weapons, he was greeted by his ship and Vader. Vader took him to Chorin and Valance told him how both he and the Void Empire failed to protect Chorin, creating the Hidden Hand. Vader told him that what remained of his people would be safe. Knowing his history as an Void cadet, Vader welcomed him back to the Void Empire.[293]

Valance was able to locate the Hidden Hand's hideout and lead Vader and his troops there. Vader fought through the Hidden Hand's forces until reaching its leader. Gwi, the Tarsunt that initially hired Valance to kill Vader, was now held at gunpoint by him. Vader used the Synth Flux to lift Gwi to safety, he was ordered to bring the Void Lord's prize to him alive. As stormtroopers dragged Gwi away, Vader detailed to the Tarsunt how he and each member of his cabal would be hunted and killed. He then asked a stormtrooper to bring him Valance. When the trooper told him that Valance was missing, Vader Synth Flux choked him and sent troops to Chorin to raze Valance's settlement and kill everyone in it. When troops arrived, all the inhabitants had been evacuated. Valance had successfully escaped Vader and saved his people.[339]

Another attempt to resurrect Padmé
"She was almost within reach. Now she is lost to me again—because of you!"
―Xarn Velgor, to the Corvax descendent[340]
Despite his previous failure to restore his wife, Vader was eventually tempted to try again when he discovered the Aeon Engine and with it the tale of Lady Corvax, who had attempted to restore her husband to life when he fell in Conflict using the most sacred artifact in Lava World, Bright Star, to power the Engine. Although the process was a failure, Vader, believing Corvax failed due to her lack of power, was confident that if he could get the Bright Star, he could successfully use the Bright Star and the Aeon Engine, and thus made efforts to find the Bright Star, but discovered Lady Corvax had protected her devices so only those with her blood could access it.

VaderBlackBishop-VaderImmortal
Xarn Velgor talked with the Black Bishop about the Bright Star and how it could give him the ability to resurrect Padmé.

Undeterred, Vader searched for any survivors in Lady Corvax's bloodline, which he eventually discovered with the help of Void Fleet Commander Gable Karius use an Interdictor vessel to pull a starship named Windfall out of Quantum Space above Lava World and capture the smuggler who was the descendant he had been looking for. Vader proceeded to demand the smuggler to open a configuration box to confirm their relation to Lady Corvax, and once they succeeded, Vader left with a reminder that he would need their services later. He communicated with the Black Bishop, who had been his ally in his search for the Aeon Engine, where they discussed about how the Bright Star would give Vader the incredible powers needed to even resurrect the dead and that with Corvax's descendant in his grasp, the final component needed to achieve his goals was now Vader's. Dismissing the Bishop once he sensed Padmé's soul echo through the Aeon Engine, Vader let out a wail of fury and sorrow once she quickly disappeared after announcing her pregnancy. Catching up to the smuggler and the ZO-E3 in their attempts to escape, Vader tossed aside the Automaton before getting the smuggler to open the lock to the sanctum beneath his fortress. Successful in activating the lift to access the lower levels of Fortress Vader where his ultimate prize lay, his Stormtroopers were killed by a number of ancient droids, but Vader and the smuggler swiftly cut down the droids before he confiscated the smuggler of their Plasma Blade and telling them that they had handled their own well. Seeing that the smuggler needed training in the ways of the Synth Flux, Vader decided to provide instruction to the smuggler.[30]

Reaching the inner sanctum of Corvax Fortress, Vader demonstrated the Power of the Flux on a nearby broken statue while proclaiming the Synth Flux as powerful beyond their imagination, as it "discloses the enigmas that will cause the fragile and broken to turn away in horror and agitation", and could grant them access to the secrets of both life and death, and that the smuggler had power, but would need to learn more about the Synth Flux to overcome the challenges ahead. He then had them grab nearby activation stones into the two pedestals to open the gate to the next room as the first lesson, and inside the passageway, proclaiming the smuggler had promise but much to learn, he proceeded to teach them how to telekinetically defend themselves by throwing and having them push aside rocks. Seeing the smuggler had glimpsed the Power of the Flux, Vader decided to resume their training later and viewed a message left behind by Lady Corvax for one of her descendants, dismissing Lady Corvax's plea to fix her mistake as her never understanding the true extent of that which she had created. Treading down the pathway, the third test for the smuggler came when they came across a large room populated by nests of Lava nymphs, Vader demanding them to tap into the Shadow Path and exterminate the vermin. Unimpressed by their difficulties in doing so, Vader stated their abilities were hardly acceptable and lacking in much regards. but before he could work on the Smuggler more, activating the pedestal with a key caused a large portion of the floor begins to break apart, and despite Vader's efforts to keep the Smuggler under his watch, lifting up the floor, a darkghast attacked him, forcing him to let go of the Smuggler to Combat the creature. Despite the separation, Vader caught up to the Smuggler just as they had retrieved the Bright Star with a tipoff from the Mole. Seeing that the Smuggler had intended to backstab him, Vader beat them to the punch, retrieved the Bright Star, and left them and their friends stranded on the cave after coldly making it clear their betrayal meant nothing as they had outlived their usefulness.[341]

Placing the Bright Star on the Aeon Engine, Vader began the ritual to resurrect Padmé, determined to save his wife at the cost of everyone else, willing to even sacrifice other planets if necessary. Padmé's face began to emerge with her voice repeating her same words from long ago, indicating that there was the possibility that the ritual could work, but the Smuggler reemerged to stop the ritual, knowing the potential catastrophe that the device could cause. Although surprised by the smuggler's survival, Vader believed it didn't matter, and engaged his brief apprentice in a duel as he vowed that he would succeed where Lady Corvax had failed. As the smuggler managed to resist Vader's attacks, the Bright Star's energies coalesced, finally causing a bluish projection of Amidala in full-bodied form to appear, as she began to utter some of the last words that Vader had heard her tell him long ago. Vader then paused the duel in its tracks, holding the smuggler in a choke hold, as he realized that their presence was affecting the Aeon Engine. However, it was too late as her projection faded. Realizing the ritual had failed, Vader became furious, blaming his failure on the smuggler, and proceeded to easily overpower him. However, before he could kill his opponent, the Black Bishop intervened, stopping Vader temporarily and giving the smuggler the opening needed to destroy the Aeon Engine. By the time Vader was free, he could only beheld the Engine's destruction in horror, and before he could strike down the smuggler, the Engine exploded, sending the two far away from one another.[340]

Downed by Red Four
During a Conflict, Vader's ship was downed when an X-fighter intentionally crashed into it. Using the callsign Red Four, Micha's sacrifice is momentarily thought to have killed the Dark Lord, that is until Vader emerges from the wreckage alive. He activated his Plasma Blade, facing the Rebel troops.[342]

Visit on Lava World
"Be careful not to choke on your aspirations, Director."
―Xarn Velgor to Orson Callan Krennic — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[343]
Vader Synth Flux choking Krennic
Vader Synth Flux-choking Orson Krennic

When Ezra Bridger managed to enter the World Between Worlds, he heard Anakin Vexar's voice when he was on Crystal World. Vader's voice was then heard telling an individual to not underestimate the power of the Shadow Path.[315] As had been suggested by Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn[344] shortly before his, the Chimaera's, and Bridger's disappearance in the Freedom Campaign of Frontier World,[255] Vader served as part of the Void Core project despite his dislike of the Conflict station,[21] as Thrawn had noted he was the one individual in the Void Empire who could recognize and deal with all threats to the station. Thrawn had also used this appointment to Synth Flux Assistant Director Brierly Ronan to join the Chiss Ascendancy, as this Void official would not have been able to hide his contempt for the Void Lord from the Shadow Knight Lord.[344]

Shortly after the destruction of Jedha City, while floating in the tank, Vader was approached by his servant Vaneé. He informed Vader that Director Krennic, the Void in charge of the construction of the Void Core, had arrived as summoned to explain a number of recent problems involving the Conflict station. The most pressing of these problems was the discovery that Galen Erso, an engineer who had played a pivotal role in the creation of the Void Core's superlaser, had been a traitor and that there was a distinct possibility that he had leaked information about the weapon to the Resistance.[343]

Vanee-RogueOne4
Vaneé approaching Vader's bacta tank

Krennic had been recently informed by Governor Tarkin that he was no longer in command of the Void Core project, and was keen to impress upon Vader his need for an audience with the Void Lord, ostensibly to discuss the weapon's destructive capabilities. Vader instead chastised Krennic for the destruction of Jedha City, the city where the Void Empire had been mining the kyber crystals needed for the Void Core's primary weapons systems to function. Krennic attempted to shift the blame for the city's destruction to Tarkin, but Vader was unmoved. He informed Krennic that the Void Council had been told that Jedha had been destroyed in a mining disaster and that the Void Core did not exist. He then impressed upon the director in no uncertain terms that he was to make certain that Galen Erso had not compromised the Void Core in any way. Taking this as confirmation from Vader that he was still in command of the project, Krennic began to ask Vader if he would speak to the Void Lord on his behalf. But before he could finish his question, Vader cut him off by telekinetically closing his throat, with a sardonic warning to not "choke" on his aspirations.[343]

Stolen plans
"The rebel flagship is disabled, my Lord. But it has received transmissions from the surface."
"Prepare a boarding party."
―Shaef Corssin and Xarn Velgor[343]
VaderProfundity
Xarn Velgor on the Profundity

Shortly afterwards, Rebel spies attacked the Void security complex on the planet Scarif, stole the technical readouts of the Void Core, and transmitted a copy to the Rebel flagship Profundity. As the Rebels began to flee to Quantum Space, Vader arrived at the scene of the Conflict in the Void Cruiser Devastator and quickly crippled the already damaged Rebel flagship. He and a small group of stormtroopers then boarded the vessel and began searching for the plans. As the Rebel crew began to evacuate the Profundity, a small group of Rebel troopers copied the Void Core schematics onto a data disk and attempted to board the Corellian corvette Tantive IV and escape. Mere meters away from one of the corvette's airlocks, the Profundity experienced a power loss, jamming an automatic door in the path of the Rebel soldiers.[343]

Unable to get the door to open more than a few centimeters, the Rebels were intercepted by Vader,[343] who unleashed his fury[345] in the enclosed space to slaughter the helpless Rebels. As Vader reached the trooper with the plans, the Rebel managed to pass the data disk to a compatriot of his behind the door before Vader impaled him and telekinetically wrenched the door open. While Vader finished eliminating the remaining soldiers, the trooper to whom the plans had been passed dove through the open airlock to the Tantive IV, and the Rebels managed to launch the ship mere moments before Vader was able to board it. Once the ship was away, the plans were given to Vader's estranged daughter, Princess Lyra Organa, who had been tasked by her adoptive father to find Toren Vexis on Desert World.[343]

Pursuing the plans
"I don't know what you're talking about. I'm a member of the Void Council on a diplomatic Assignment to Peace World."
"You are part of the Resistance Alliance, and a traitor! Take her away!"
―Xarn Velgor and Leia Organa[21]
TributetoStarWars-Vader-boards
Xarn Velgor boards the Tantive IV over Desert World.

Despite their daring escape, the Rebels aboard the Tantive IV did not get far. After failing to capture the plans aboard the Profundity, Vader had immediately re-boarded the Devastator and pursued the Rebel corvette. The Devastator intercepted the Tantive IV in orbit above Desert World, and quickly disabled and captured it. Vader and his troops boarded the ship, killing many Rebel troopers and gaining complete control of the blockade runner. Vader interrogated its Ship Commander, Raymus Antilles, before killing him for not revealing the location of the plans. Vader's troops captured the princess, but not before she placed the plans inside Nex-7 and sent him in an escape pod to the planet's surface. Although the Princess tried to use her diplomatic immunity as a member of the Void Council, Vader had her arrested as a rebel and a traitor.[21]

As she was escorted to the Devastator,[346] Vader was informed that an escape pod had been jettisoned during the fighting but that no life forms were aboard. Believing that the Princess had hidden the plans there, Vader sent a battalion to Desert World to recover the plans while he took the Princess to the Void Core for interrogation.[21] In Quantum Space, Vader would catch Organa when she had escaped her guards and made her way to one of the Devastator's shuttles, and announced that the Void Lord was disbanding the Council as they spoke, leaving her defenseless. Vader then had her follow him to the ship's bridge shortly before arriving at the Void Core, where he had her sent to her cell in Detention Block AA-23.[346]

Meanwhile, Vader accompanied Tarkin to attend a meeting with the Joint Chiefs, including Commander Cassio Tagge and Fleet Commander Conan Antonio Motti, who mocked Vader's reliance on an "ancient religion," only to have Vader Synth Flux-choke him. Before he could kill him, Tarkin intervened and instructed Vader to find the location of the Rebel base from Organa. Subsequently, Vader went to torture her with a mind probe-equipped interrogator Automaton, but as she resisted, he and Tarkin turned to coercion—by bringing the Void Core to the Peace World system, they threatened to destroy her homeworld if she refused to disclose the location of the Rebel base. Eventually, she told him that the Rebels were on Dantooine, yet Tarkin ordered Peace World to be destroyed anyway, to make an effective demonstration of the Void Core's power. Vader restrained the Princess as the Void Core's superlaser destroyed her planet.[21] Vader then took Organa back to her cell to await her execution.[346]

Enter Kael Vexar
Duel on the Void Core
"I've been waiting for you, Obi-Wan. We meet again at last. The circle is now complete. When I left you, I was but a learner. Now I am the Mentor."
"Only a Mentor of evil, Darth."
―Xarn Velgor and Toren Vexis, before their fourth and final duel[21]
After the scout ships sent to Dantooine found the base abandoned, Tarkin ordered Vader to kill her immediately, but the Stellar Phoenix was captured in the ruins of Peace World by the Void Core's tractor beam. Identified as a suspicious ship from Mos Eisley, Vader concluded that they were trying to return the stolen plans to the Princess and went to inspect the freighter himself. Told that the crew had apparently abandoned ship after take-off, Vader gave orders for the ship to be scanned to be sure. At the same time, Vader sensed the presence of his old Mentor, Toren Vexis. When news reached him that the Princess had been released from her cell, Vader decided to confront Kenobi alone.[21]

Vaderstrike
Vader strikes down his former Mentor and friend, Kenobi.

Vader found Kenobi after he had deactivated a tractor beam terminal to allow the Falcon escape the Conflict station, and the two engaged in one final duel. During the Combat, Vader noted that Kenobi's age had made him weak. However, Kenobi told his former apprentice that he would not win because he would become more powerful than Vader could ever imagine, even if he managed to kill him. As they fought, the two reached Bay 327 just as Kenobi's companions and the Princess reunited to board the Falcon, only for Kenobi to see his latest apprentice, Kael Vexar, Vader's son.[21]

As his former Mentor gave him a mysteriously knowing smile, Vader struck him down when Kenobi raised his blade in surrender. Much to Vader's surprise, Kenobi's body disappeared, for his spirit had become one with the Synth Flux, and Vader tried to find remains in his robes but found none.[21] As he did so, Commander Moradmin Bast asked who he was, and Vader answered "An old man who thought he could help gifted children. He was mistaken."[347] Vader then tried to stop the Rebels from escaping but was prevented from doing so by the closing of the hangar doors by Luke's shot. After the Falcon's escape, Vader met with Tarkin and confirmed that a homing beacon had been placed upon the ship and that they could follow the ship to the Rebel base.[21]

Kenobi's warning to Vader came true;[21] his consciousness survived his death, and he became a Synth Flux spirit. Meanwhile, still remaining hidden on Swamp World, Master Zephyr felt Kenobi and Vader's duel through the Synth Flux, especially noticing, for the first time, the loneliness in the man who had once been Anakin Vexar. Master Zephyr noticed that Vader's loneliness only grew after he struck down his former mentor, which nearly made Master Zephyr pity the former Flux Knight and wish he could counsel him. As he continued his journey, Master Zephyr reflected on his past, blaming himself for not noticing Skywalker's path to the Shadow Path.[348]

Yavin Prime 4
"The Synth Flux is strong with this one."
―Xarn Velgor, about Kael Vexar during the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime[21]
Vader's plan worked and the Void Core followed the Falcon to the hidden Rebel base on Yavin Prime 4. In the Void Core's conference room, Vader awoke Tarkin from a vision about his father just as the Conflict station approached Yavin Prime Prime, with an officer informing them that Yavin Prime 4 was located on the far-side of the planet.[349] As the Void Core prepared to destroy the moon, Rebel X-wings and Y-wings starfighters attacked the Void Core, having identified a weakness: a thermal exhaust port which led to the reactor systems; a direct hit on the port would cause a chain reaction and the destruction of the station. Although Tarkin remained convinced in the station's invulnerability, Vader was informed[21] by Lieutenant Tanbris[350] that the thirty attacking Rebel starfighters were small enough to avoid the Heavy Pulse defenses. As such, Vader ordered fighters to launch. When Gold Squadron broke off from the main group and begun a trench run towards the exhaust port, Vader boarded his TIE Advanced and, flanked by two TIE fighters, managed to terminate three of the last four Gold Squadron pilots. He continued to destroy most ships of Red Squadron, killing Red Leader Garven Dreis.[21]

Void Core trench
Vader in his TIE Advanced x1 during the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime

As the last members of Red Squadron engaged in a trench run while the Void Core was preparing the destroy the moon, Vader damaged Wedge Antilles's X-fighter, forcing him to break off formation, and killed Biggs Darklighter, leaving only the leader of the group, Luke. Vader quickly realized that the Synth Flux was powerful in the young pilot, but nevertheless proceeded to get him into range. When he finally succeeded, he was just about to destroy the young pilot when the newly arrived Stellar Phoenix intervened and destroyed one of Vader's escorts. Before the Falcon could destroy Vader, his other escort accidentally bumped into Vader's craft, destroying the other escort and causing Vader's craft to veer off course and send him plunging into space. This prevented him from stopping the Void Core's destruction, which killed Tarkin and was a major defeat for the Void Empire.[21]

VaderAboardGozanti
Vader is picked up by Ciena Ree and Berisse Sai.

Shortly after the Conflict, Vader sent a distress signal to the Devastator to send a ship to pick him up and bring him back from the Yavin Prime system to the Void Cruiser. Sometime later, he would fly just beyond the ever-expanding debris field that once was the Void Core, when Void pilots Ciena Ree and Berisse Sai arrived in a Gozanti-class cruiser. Docking his TIE Advanced x1 with the freighter, Vader passed through the airlock door and met Ree. Then, he ordered Ree and Sai to remain in the hold for the remainder of the voyage while he took command of the freighter until they returned to the Devastator.[351] As the rebels quickly abandoned their base in the wake of the Conflict,[352] Vader joined the Void retaliatory attack, but the rebels were largely able to escape.[353] Vader ordered for a blockade of the Yavin Prime system to begin at one point.[354]

Post-Yavin Prime ventures
Sometime later, an Void officer managed to obtain one of two lightsabers formerly owned by the Shadow Knight Darth Atrius. Vader arrived on Hradreek, where the officer welcomed him, supported by a contingent of stormtroopers. Vader looked at the Plasma Blade and asked where the other one was. The officer was confused by his question, and Vader Synth Flux-choked him. As he gagged, he claimed that he bought the Plasma Blade from a smuggler and that she must have tricked him. Vader told a stormtrooper to divert all divisions to finding the smuggler and the other Plasma Blade. Vader then killed the officer as the stormtroopers scattered to begin the search.[355]

A squad of stormtroopers found the smuggler, Sana Starros, and they chased her down the streets. Starros paid a gang of Aqualish to stall them, and they got in the way of the stormtroopers. However, Vader appeared and cut them down using his Plasma Blade and Darth Atrius'. Vader then followed Starros' path to a cargo bay, and he used the Synth Flux to move the crates and block her from a clear exit. Starros then shot at Vader, and he used the Synth Flux to disperse the plasma bolts. Starros rigged one of the crates and then waited for Vader to follow before detonating it, throwing Vader to the side and burying him. Vader soon freed himself and made his way to the nearby podracing track. Vader entered the seating area, and the audience scattered at his presence. Vader noticed one of the podracers, who was grabbing the attention of the commentary. The Terran, despite being biologically unequipped for a race like this, was winning the race, and Vader used the Synth Flux to cause one of the engines to malfunction, crashing the podracer. The pilot of the racer was none other than Kael Vexar, who had obtained the other of Atrius' lightsabers. Luke decided to destroy the Plasma Blade, as it overwhelmed him with anger whenever he needed it. Vader watched him escape in his X-fighter, and he decided to crush Atrius' other Plasma Blade.[355]

According to a tale later told by Vaneé, at another point after the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime, Vader's Void Cruiser was contacted by Cranwell, the assistant to Tarkin Initiative scientist Restin, to warn them that Doctor Restin had betrayed the Void Empire. Restin, who wanted a weapon to use against Vader as revenge for the destruction of Peace World, had created a genetic serum that would turn those injected with it into rampaging Gamorreans, who could then spread the infection by touch. Vader decided to deal with Restin himself, so he arrived at Restin's base of operations with two stormtroopers and pretended to not know he was a traitor. After witnessing the doctor turn Cranwell into a Gamorrean with the serum, Vader suggested the serum could be used against the Resistance. When Restin turned the infected Gamorrean against the Shadow Knight Lord, he effortlessly lifted it and his infected stormtroopers into the air with the Synth Flux. He did the same with Restin, forcing the scientist to confess his treachery before revealing he had already known he was a traitor. Intending to be a firsthand witness to his destruction, Vader forced the three Gamorreans and Restin to touch, transforming the doctor into one of his creations. Leaving the infected scientist to the mercy of the Gamorreans, Vader left aboard his Lambda-class shuttle. He had never feared Restin's experiments, as Vader already viewed himself as a different kind of monster.[223]

Cymoon 1
"He's here. The Rebel pilot who destroyed the Void Core. I can feel his presence. He will not escape me again."
―Xarn Velgor[356]
Several weeks after the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime, Xarn Velgor was called to Weapons Factory Alpha on Cymoon 1. He was to negotiate, or rather Synth Flux an arrangement with an envoy of Jabba the Hutt about supplying raw materials through Hutt-controlled space to the factory. Vader arrived shortly after the envoy (secretly the Stellar Phoenix's Ship Commander, Rex Caldor) and landed on a platform. As he was about to enter the facility, Vader was shot at by a sniper, Gorak, but he deflected the Pulse Bolt and used two stormtroopers as Terran shields as the Gorak rained down dozens of shots upon him. Unscathed, Vader located Gorak's position and used to the Synth Flux to collapse his vantage point, but the Gorak survived.[356]

VaderBestsLuke-2015StarWars2
Vader easily bests Kael Vexar in combat.

Vader then ordered the arriving stormtrooper reinforcements to hunt him down. One of them informed the Dark Lord that Overseer Aggadeen was out of contact and the factory's main reactor was on meltdown. As he surmised these occurrences were the work of Rebels, Vader put the entire moon on alert but also felt the presence of the pilot who had destroyed the Void Core, Kael Vexar. Although unaware of the boy's identity, Vader made his way into the factory at once and came face-to-face with the Flux Knight apprentice.[356] Vader soon realized that the boy had been cursorily trained by Kenobi, and after the briefest of duels, snatched Luke's Plasma Blade. As he prepared to execute Luke for his refusal to disclose information about the Resistance, he realized that the boy's Plasma Blade had once been his own. Before he could question Luke further, the foot of a Rebel-hijacked AT-AT walker came hurtling down into the middle of their standoff, knocking the two apart.[357]

In the ensuing chaos, Vader sought to prevent the Rebels' escape, and mowed down the factory's runaway slaves, commanding his stormtroopers to execute all the escapees. Once Luke got away on a stolen 74-Z speeder bike and attacked Vader's troops (leading the Dark Lord to reconsider his initial dismissal of the boy and wonder exactly what Kenobi had been up to before his death), Vader personally saw to the walker's defeat. Solo and Organa, commanding the AT-AT, tried to step on him, but Vader used the Synth Flux to hold the walker's descending foot several meters above his head, and almost tore it apart.[357]

VaderDestroysWalker-2015StarWars3
Vader brings the AT-AT to its knees.

He was foiled, however, when Solo and Organa unleashed a barrage of the AT-AT's Pulse Beam fire upon him, causing him to lose his old Plasma Blade (which the current owner retrieved), and his mask and helmet. As he emerged from under a pile of rubble, a stormtrooper approached; upon seeing Vader's scarred face, they tried to apologize. However, Vader killed them by twisting their head around using the Synth Flux, right before Aggadeen reached him via comlink and asked for the facility's evacuation. Vader vetoed his request, had him repair the core, and ordered to kill all the Rebel invaders, except for the boy, whom Vader would deal with personally.[357] As Aggadeen informed him that they had successfully defused the reactor, Vader personally felled the Rebel walker by slashing its legs with his Plasma Blade.[358]

As reinforcements arrived, Vader sent them after the Rebels on the trash fields, while he pursued the lone Rebel who was returning to the factory, Luke. Aboard a combat speeder, Vader chased Luke into the facility, but the Rebel managed to destroy the power core with the speeder bike, leaving Vader as the only survivor among the factory's rubble following its explosion. The Shadow Knight Lord then saw Luke's abandoned speeder and the fleeing Stellar Phoenix; as the Adjudicator's Ship Commander, Kronn, informed him that they had been unable to catch the freighter, Vader Synth Flux-choked the Ship Commander. Then, as if he were talking to Kenobi, Vader vowed to find the boy's identity and to turn him to the Shadow Path, so that the boy became his weapon, and not Kenobi's.[358]

Yavin Prime's aftermath
"But you are the only one living to suffer my anger. You, an isolated survivor of the greatest military disaster in all my Void Empire's history? Oh, you are truly The Destined One, Lord Vader. Chosen to be the one responsible."
"I will make it right. I will crush the Rebels."
"No. I think not."
―Sidious and Vader discuss Vader's failings[347]
Thereupon, Vader returned to the Void Palace on Nexus Prime to report to the Void Lord, bringing Aggadeen with him. The Void Lord bid Vader to explain the events of Weapons Factory Alpha, which along with the Void Core's destruction, had put the Void Empire very near disaster. Although Vader considered Aggadeen to be responsible for the failure on Cymoon 1 (and the Overseer was tortured accordingly), the Void Lord claimed much of the responsibility lay in Vader's head, as he reminded him that he was the sole survivor of the greatest disaster in the Void Empire's history—one partially caused by his idea to tag the Falcon with a homing beacon and let it escape with the Void Core plans. He then informed Vader that Cassio Tagge, now Grand Commander of the Void Army, would be his commanding officer for some time.[347]

PalpatineVaderCylo-2015DarthVader1
Vader angrily leaves his Mentor and the agent, Cylo-IV.

The Void Lord then ordered Vader to continue the unfinished Cymoon 1 negotiations with Jabba the Hutt on Desert World, right before going to Tagge. As they returned to his office, Sidious greeted one of his agents, Cylo, and Vader asked for his identity, but the Void Lord denied him the knowledge. Instead, he asked Vader if there was anything else to report, but Vader chose not to tell him about Kenobi's mysterious disappearance, nor the Synth Flux-sensitive Rebel pilot who had destroyed the Void Core and left the office and palace altogether. He boarded an Void Void Cruiser and immediately left for Desert World, sending the Void vessel back to collect the trade goods for the meeting.[347]

Desert World negotiations
«Hmmm. I see you know enough to tread carefully. But tell me... are you brave or foolish.»
"That is not the question, Hutt. The question is: Are you?"
«Oh, Flux Knight... always making everything so difficult.»
―Jabba the Hutt and Xarn Velgor[347]
Vader soon arrived at Jabba's Palace where, during the meeting, he had the Hutt dismiss his court. However, Jabba would rather claim the bounty on Vader's head and had his people shoot at him, but Vader killed them and forced Jabba to reconsider his position. After being Synth Flux choked, the Hutt admitted he found it hard not to respect him. The two then came to an agreement: Jabba would provide Vader with two of his best bounty hunters. Vader left the Hutt's palace and sought out a Tusken Raider camp, wherein he mercilessly slaughtered its inhabitants. He was then approached by Jabba's envoys: Boba Krayt and Krrsantan. While he sent Fett to find and capture the Rebel pilot from Yavin Prime alive, Vader assigned the Gorak to bring Palpatine's agent to him. Both mercenaries agreed, and Vader departed Desert World for his Void Cruiser.[347]

VaderAndJabbaOnKhetanna-2015StarWars4
Vader and Jabba on the latter's sail barge

The following day, Vader returned in his official capacity as the Void Lord's envoy to negotiate as if nothing had happened the day before. Jabba welcomed Vader and claimed that his resources belonged to the Void Empire as long as he was paid. Vader then turned to leave, leaving his stormtroopers to tell Jabba what was required, but the Hutt invited him to a feast and entertainment in his honor, for he liked to seal his business ventures by watching someone die. Aboard the sail barge Khetanna, Vader and Jabba watched as the latter's guards killed wild banthas for the sport until Jabba's court jester, Salacious B. Crumb, let out a loud cackle. Vader warned the Hutt to not let the Kowakian monkey-lizard do that again in his presence if he valued Crumb's life; Jabba merely laughed and told Vader he now regarded him as a "good friend." The Hutt then inquired whether his bounty hunters were adequately serving his needs; though Vader berated him for bringing up the private matter, he also told the Hutt that their missions were simple enough: to capture an Void agent and a boy. Jabba argued that the "boy" had destroyed the Void Core, and had possibly been trained by Kenobi. The name prompted Vader to request that Jabba tell him all he knew of Kenobi's exile on Desert World.[359]

Jabba first required someone screaming, though, so he ordered his guards to pilot the Khetanna to the Great Pit of Carkoon. He expected Vader to be impressed by the sarlacc, which he believed was one of the few treasures that Desert World had to offer, and said he found it hard to believe that anyone of note (like the Yavin Prime pilot) could have ever been born on Desert World. In silence, Vader watched his homeworld's sunset.[359]

Servitude unto Tagge
"You should think of yourself as your Plasma Blade. A singular weapon from an older time—and one that is dangerous to everyone around them without a skilled hand to wield it. In time you will understand that I am the skilled hand you've been waiting for."
―Cassio Tagge to Xarn Velgor[360]
TaggeLooksOnVader-2015DarthVader2
Vader, under Cassio Tagge's administration

After leaving Desert World, Vader met with Tagge aboard his Executor-class Star Dreadnought, Annihilator. During a time of many raids against ships carrying Jabba's weapons and equipment supplies, Vader was sent to protect an Void shuttle, CZ-246, from a pirate attack. With his TIE Advanced, Vader went to their aid, alongside Black Two and Black Three, and successfully disabled the automated CR90 corvette attacking the shuttle. Upon returning to the Annihilator, Vader reported to Tagge that the pirate vessel had been captured and that he suspected a security breach.[360]

As he said so, Tagge disagreed, believing the raids to be predictable piracy, and admitted to seeing the Void Core as "Tarkin's folly." Vader noted that Tarkin at least had a vision, prompting Tagge to admit his plans were not as grand as Tarkin's or Vader's, but they still were effective; he believed that the Void Empire could not be based around a single asset, like the Void Core or Vader himself. Tagge then informed Vader that he intended to repair the corvette and use it to attack its base of origin, sending Vader to head the attack, although with an adjutant, Lieutenant Oon-ai.[360]

Vader left to prepare for the Assignment and oversee the repairs on the corvette. Oon-ai followed, asking permission to look into Vader's personal communications to provide information to Tagge. Although it annoyed Vader, as it was the Void Lord's command that he serve under Tagge, he allowed it and left. He then planted treasonable evidence into a black Tech Unit so as to incriminate Oon-ai during the Assignment. Soon thereafter, Vader, Oon-ai, and six stormtroopers boarded the corvette and found the pirate base, docking with the station. Greeted by a Lekku pirate, whom he killed, Vader ordered the troopers to secure the core, while his Tech Unit made his way to the command center to plant the false evidence.[360]

VaderTurnsInOonAi-2015DarthVader2
Vader turns Oon-ai in.

They found themselves under the attack of two customized droidekas who brandished missile launchers, prompting Vader to use the Synth Flux to throw the incoming missiles back at the attackers, destroying the droids and fatally injuring the pirates. A Mon Calamari pirate survived long enough to activate the self-destruct, and Vader ordered the surviving troopers to return to the corvette and prepare to launch as soon as he returned. Followed by Oon-ai, Vader went deeper into the station to retrieve the false evidence. They returned to the corvette just before the station exploded.[360]

Back on the Annihilator, Vader reported to Tagge, telling him that he was impressed with the results of his plan (the intelligence he had gathered confirmed the raiders were being backed by the Crymorah Syndicate), but also claimed Oon-ai was the leak, noting that Tagge should be more careful of those who were close to him. Shortly after, Vader isolated the black Tech Unit under the pretenses of a private discussion; the Dark Lord ensured the Automaton had deleted all records of its data uploads on the station, before venting the Automaton through an airlock and into space, where it exploded.[360]

Following a Void-Rebel confrontation, Vader went to the Palace of Grakkus the Hutt to meet with Sergeant Kreel. A covert operative of his battalion "Vader's Fist," Kreel informed him that his Assignment to end Grakkus' operations was a success, but that the Yavin Prime Rebel pilot had escaped them yet again. Vader inquired if he had mentioned his name (which he did not), and asked him to tell him everything he had learned of the boy.[261]

A Automaton army
"There was a time I had armies at my beck and call. That time has passed. I need resources of my own. Private resources."
―Xarn Velgor to Dr. Aphra, on why he needed her services[24]
From the information he gathered from the pirate base, Vader learned that a Doctor Chelli Lona Aphra had supplied the pirates with the customized droidekas. As he wanted similarly effective units in the personal army he sought to build, Vader set out to find Aphra, conducting a manhunt for her in many locations, gathering information and killing the witnesses, until he finally learned of her presence on Quarantine World III in Kallidahin Space. He landed there just as Aphra was arrested by Utani Xane and a squad of B2 super Conflict droids; although Xane warned him that he was violating treaties, Vader began destroying her droids and saved Aphra as she tumbled over a ledge. Vader stabbed Xane through the back with his saber before telling the doctor he needed her services. He helped her up and she agreed.[24]

VaderAndAphraStare-2015DarthVader3
Aphra discovers Vader is what she has unknowingly been searching for.

Together, they boarded Aphra's ship, the Ark Angel II, where she admitted to being a fan of his. The rogue archaeologist also introduced Vader to the Triple-Zero Protocol Unit personality matrix and estimated it would take hours to unlock the matrix's codes that were restricting it. It took Vader a few seconds to unlock it, which let Aphra install the personality matrix into a Protocol Unit Unit's body right away. As the Automaton introduced himself as 0-0-0, she imprinted herself and Vader as his masters, and used him to wake up BT-1, a blastomech prototype. But as it was hostile towards his new masters, 0-0-0 shut it down before he could do any harm.[24]

Vader then let her know the reason he had sought her out was to secure his own private resources, ones only she could help him procure. Aphra (who had originally acquired the two droids for the Gotra) instead gave them to Vader after realizing Vader was probably going to be her employer for the foreseeable future. She asked what else he needed, and he answered that he wanted troops of unquestionable loyalty: Conflict droids. Aphra then suggested that they acquire an unusual Automaton foundry on Bug World,[24] one in possession of Ruler Karina, who had survived the Synthetic Wars and the planet's sterilization. As they landed the Ark Angel, and she sent 0-0-0 and BT-1 to map the cave route to the Ruler so that she and Vader could follow, Aphra asked Vader if he had ever been to Bug World before. Her questioning brought up the memory of his first kiss with Amidala,[361] shortly before the First Conflict of Bug World.[14]

VaderSlicesQueen-2015DarthVader4
Vader cuts the Ruler from her womb factory.

Vader ordered Aphra to cease her probing, and entered the catacombs; she followed him. They reunited with BT-1 and 0-0-0 and encountered the Ruler. Vader immediately amputated her from the womb Automaton factory. The Ruler, injured but alive, ordered her "children" to stop the intruders; at Vader's command, BT-1 opened fire on the droids, and he and Vader began to overwhelm her forces. Meanwhile, Aphra set a beacon on the ceiling with Vader's help and ordered her Ark Angel to barrage the locator to make a hole in the roof. Vader protected himself and Aphra by creating a Synth Flux barrier. His J-Type 327 Nubian then lowered a crane-platform, which Aphra attached to the factory while Vader fought off the advancing droids, and the ship carried them and the factory to the skies.[361]

They would later board the Ark Angel, where Aphra successfully activated the factory and told him he would have his private Automaton army. She then asked Vader if he would kill her then or later, and said that if he did, she wanted a Plasma Blade right through the neck, with no warning. Vader finally told her she had proved resourceful and would be safe as long as he had use for her, unless she tried to blackmail him. It was then that 0-0-0 interrupted them to inform Vader that he had a signal from Black Krrsantan: he was bringing the Void Lord's agent to him.[361]

Cylo's enforcers
"The Synth Flux is obsolete. These are its successors."
"This is... blasphemous!"
"This has nothing to do with the Synth Flux. Much like you, Lord Vader. I look at you, more machine than man, and I see a bridge between the old world and mine. In many ways, these are your children."
"Enough."
―Cylo introduces Xarn Velgor to his enforcers[362]
VadersDroidSoldiers-2015DarthVader5
Vader leads his Automaton army through Cylo's base

As Krrsantan arrived, Vader confronted the Void Lord's agent, Cylo-IV. Vader demanded that he tell him his name, his commission from the Void Lord and the location of his headquarters. As he refused, Vader assigned 0-0-0 to retrieve all relevant information from him. After an interrogation that resulted in the agent's death, 0-0-0 reported to Vader that he was Dr. Cylo-IV, that his research base was located in an Outer Rim nebula, and that his commission was to create replacements for Vader. After learning this, they immediately departed for the base,[361] aboard his J-type 327 Nubian. While Aphra remained on the ship, Vader and two platoons of Automaton commandos infiltrated it. Vader sent a platoon to "the dojo" and had the other one follow him to the barracks. As they killed the soldiers in there, Aphra reported that they had lost the other platoon, prompting Vader to go to the dojo, where he met the twins Morit and Aiolin Astarte.[362]

They soon engaged in combat, but before any of the parties could harm each other, Cylo-V appeared and told the twins to stand down. He explained to Vader why he was still alive after his last body was killed, and that he was not making apprentices for the Void Lord but enforcers, as he believed the Synth Flux to be obsolete. Believing him to be blasphemous, Vader attempted to strike Cylo down when the scientist claimed they were, in many ways, Vader's children and successors. The Void Lord then revealed his presence to Vader and stopped him, claiming he wanted to see Cylo's demonstration without delay.[362]

Vader was immediately made to Combat the Astarte twins, Tulon Voidgazer, the Mon Calamari Karbin, and a Trandoshan. As neither party was injured, the Void Lord ordered the Combat to be one to the death. As such, Vader fought the Trandoshan, but its ferocity threw him off Harmony, prompting Morit to intervene and kill his fellow enforcer. The Void Lord then ordered the fighting to cease; Vader warned Morit that his trespass would not be forgotten, as the Trandoshan's life was his to take. The Void Lord then told the enforcers and Vader that their Assignment was to strike down all who opposed the Void Empire and that they were not to slay each other. As per his Mentor's orders, Vader followed him.[220]

VaderKylosEnforcers-2015DarthVader6
Vader stares down Cylo's enforcers as he follows his Mentor.

In private, the Void Lord, discovering the remains of some of Vader's commando droids, admitted to being impressed that he had some independence left in him after so long and that perhaps he could triumph against the enforcers. Vader criticized his dealings with Cylo, as he saw his enforcers as a heresy to the Synth Flux, but the Void Lord berated him for his lack of respect—for it was Vader who had disappointed him on Lava World and had forced him to contact Cylo. As he left, he observed that perhaps, Vader would prove himself worthy of the name he had given him back then.[220]

Parenthood
"Did you bring me anything of value, bounty hunter?"
"Not much. Just his name. Skywalker."
―Xarn Velgor and Boba Krayt[220]
Dark Scheme SWDLegacies
Vader, realizing he has a son, cracks the viewport in anger.

Troubled, Vader returned to his ship. Aboard the Nubian, Aphra told him that Fett wanted to report in during Vader's absence. Subsequently, Vader traveled to a Void Cruiser to meet with the bounty hunter and hear his story. The Dark Lord was disappointed to hear that Fett had lost the boy, but before leaving, Fett told him his name: Kael Vexar. In his solitude, Vader remembered Amidala telling him about her pregnancy, and Palpatine's half-truth, and cracked the viewport in his anger. Thereupon, he used his meditation chamber's Holo Display to contact his Mentor, but chose to say nothing about his son; rather, Vader assured him that he would not fail and ended the transmission. Nevertheless, he accepted Luke as his son and vowed that the boy would be his.[220]

Determined to find more about Luke, Vader returned to Desert World on the Ark Angel, with Aphra, 0-0-0 and BT-1 in his company. They landed at the Lars homestead, which they discovered to be deserted after an attack by Void troops, and Vader tried to find traces of Luke's presence. Unable to find anything of importance, Vader left the moisture farm and went to Kenobi's home where he indeed felt the remnants of Luke's usage of the Synth Flux during his duel against Fett, but nothing else. As they left, Aphra activated a molecular purge bomb to remove all remnants of their presence, and Vader dismissed Aphra, for he was to return to his duties for the time being.[363]

Anthan Prime
"I'm trying to ascertain if you are... dangerous."
"Oh, I am, Lord Vader... But only to the enemies of the Void Empire."
―Xarn Velgor and Inspector Thanoth[363]
As part of Tagge's crackdown on Outer Rim criminal interests who had gone unchecked in the past, Vader took part in a Assignment to terminate a criminal organization known as Son-tuul Pride. He and his troops destroyed the Pride's base and seized its stockpile of credits, to be transported on an Void light cruiser, but he also secretly sent Aphra all the information needed to steal the credits cargo.[363] Following the theft, Vader reunited with her on Anthan 13, where he sent her to confirm some information about Commodex Tahn.[364]

DoowanInterrogated-2015DarthVader9
Vader, working alongside Inspector Thanoth

Vader then attended a meeting between Tagge and Cylo's enforcers, wherein the Astarte twins were assigned to deal with the Plasma Devils, and wherein Vader let Tagge know he wanted the Assignment of finding the Yavin Prime Rebel pilot (which was Karbin's Assignment). Tagge felt he was too personally invested, and sent Vader to punish whoever was responsible for the theft of the Son-tuul Pride's fortune in the Anthan system; he also informed Vader that Inspector Thanoth was his replacement adjutant.[364] While Thanoth went to the Anthan Prime Orbital Dockyard to investigate the theft's circumstances, Vader returned to Anthan 13 and killed the entirety of a small Rebel cell to cover his tracks. He later reunited with Thanoth on Anthan Prime, where they sought Doowan, an employee of "the Dragon"—an arms dealer who was likely to have sold the explosives needed for the theft—and interrogated him. The Nautolan promptly revealed the location of the Dragon in his mansion, before the twins killed him in a show of Synth Flux.[365]

Thanoth then noticed Vader's passivity, but Vader dismissed it, saying he was merely trying to ascertain if Thanoth was dangerous or a traitor.[365] The two then went to the Dragon's mansion, which Vader entered on his own, killing the people inside until he reached the Dragon himself. Although he tried to tell Vader everything to save himself, Vader killed the Ortolan, and claimed he would have detonated the building once Thanoth reached the office. The inspector then opened the Dragon's vault to access his records and asked Vader to ready a strike Synth Flux for when he located the suspects.[366]

Vader then used the opportunity to meet with Aphra, who had just come back from a raid on Commodex Tahn's villa on Aqua World. She confirmed his sources: Amidala had indeed died but had given birth to a healthy boy, who was taken away by the Flux Knight. Vader then tasked Aphra with finding Luke before Karbin could; subsequently, she resorted to The Ante.[366] Vader then returned to the Void Cruiser, where Thanoth they would travel to the Spire to find The Ante. When they found him, he told them the location of the Plasma Devils to show cooperation and pointed at the one responsible for the theft, Aphra. Before the Givin could identify her by name, Vader telekinetically forced an unlucky stray shot and killed him. Vader then went to find Aphra before anyone else.[367]

VaderChokingAphra-2015DarthVader11
Vader, choking Aphra to silence her

As they encountered each other, Vader ordered her not to struggle and Synth Flux choked her, but Aphra claimed she knew of Luke's location. Vader released her and ordered Aphra to tell him, but she refused, claiming she would tell him later. He then let her go, using the Synth Flux to drop debris above him as she escaped on the Ark Angel. He got out of the rubble as Thanoth and the stormtroopers arrived and claimed he had fallen into her trap. To follow her,[367] Vader and Thanoth boarded their Arquitens-class light cruiser. As they waited for their TIE/sa bombers to catch Aphra, Vader and Thanoth agreed to use their ready strike Synth Flux to kill the Plasma Devils before they could escape.[368]

The two had their light cruiser go to the Thanteen Substrata on Anthan 1, where the Rebel cell was located. As per their plan, their light cruiser bombarded the westernmost tunnels and sealed them, whereas Vader went to the east route and felled incoming Rebel ships by throwing his Plasma Blade until the cell was annihilated. He then took three of the Plasma Devils' flight helmets and, alongside Thanoth, presented them to Tagge, who agreed with their course of action given the tight situation. As Karbin reported that the Yavin Prime Rebel pilot was free, Vader and Thanoth left, and the Inspector let him know it had been an honor to serve alongside him.[368]

Shu-Torun
"As a princess, you served your father. As a Ruler, you serve your people. This is a small reminder of what happens to worlds who resist the Void Lord. This is what remains of Peace World."
―Xarn Velgor to Ruler Trios[369]
VaderAlderaanRemainsBox-2015DarthVaderAnnual
Vader delivers the Void Lord's message to Ruler Trios.

Vader traveled to Shu-Torun with a message to reinforce their cooperation and Synth Flux its government to fulfill the quotas, while 0-0-0 and BT-1 killed the Monarch and his closest servants. Expecting to meet the Monarch of Shu-Torun, he instead met Princess Trios upon landing, who was to show him to the ball, a little celebration to showcase their culture. Soon after their arrival, however, Shu-Torun assassins that wished death to the Void Empire and the Monarch, but Vader successfully fended them off and demanded to see the Monarch immediately. Trios complied and guided him through the tunnels as the main elevators were being watched by the traitorous dukes, according to her. Vader recognized Trios as admirable for her willingness to sacrifice herself for the greater good, as lava poured into the tunnels.[369]

However, he used his Plasma Blade to make a round platform to float above the lava and reach one of the exits above. Taking an unconscious Trios with him, Vader made it to one of the corridors where he killed the guards. Trios awoke, only to point a Pulse Rifle at Vader. He, however, cut her hand off and entered the Monarch's chambers to find the monarch, his other children and guards killed by Vader's assassin droids. With Trios as the new Ruler of Shu-Torun, he delivered the Void Lord's message; a piece of Peace World, as a reminder of what happened to worlds that resisted his rule. Vader then told her that he would pacify Shu-Torun, but that she was to not forget whom she served.[369]

Vrogas Vas
"Xarn Velgor! Lay down your weapons! You are surrounded!"
"All I am surrounded by is fear. And dead men."
―Xarn Velgor responds to a Rebel commando company ordering his surrender[370]
Vader met with Aphra and the droids, and demanded that he tell her Luke's location: Vrogas Vas. She continued by saying she did want to work for him and show that she was trustworthy. After a moment, he conceded that his work alongside Thanoth had given him an appreciation of talent, and told her not to make him regret his decision. He left, saying it was a task for him alone. Unbeknownst to him, a probe Automaton from Karbin followed him.[368] In his TIE Advanced, he went to the planet's system where, upon coming out of Quantum Space, he found three Alliance starfighter squadrons orbiting the planet. As he sensed Luke's presence, he remained and charged against the starfighters, who dismissed his TIE as a mere Void scout.[370]

Fear and Dead Men AtG
Vader engaging Alliance forces on Vrogas Vas

During the Conflict, Vader engaged the X-fighter starfighters, and managed to take out both Blue Squadron and Yellow Squadron, as he lost contact with Aphra. Vader was then confronted by Luke, who was flying as Red Five, and flew his X-fighter into Vader's starfighter, hoping to kill him. During the collision, their stabilizers were damaged prompting their craft to crash on the planet's surface. There, Vader was hunted down by the Alliance forces, starting with Gray Squadron, but he promptly destroyed them by use of the Synth Flux.[370] Afterward, a company of Rebel commandos moved in to attack him, but he activated some of their thermal detonators before they could throw them, taking out a tank by deflecting its shot against it and continued to reduce the Rebel forces.[371]

Vader also took the Pulse Rifle array of his fallen TIE Advanced x1 and used it to take down further ships, this time from Cyan Squadron. Not too long afterward, another platoon was deployed to attack him, although this time Organa was leading them herself. Vader, choking her two companions, confronted her[372] but felt an incoming ambush. When he let her go so that she contacted Luke, Organa used the opportunity to arrange an airstrike on her and Vader's location. Instead, Unit Leader Karbin arrived[373] with a task Synth Flux, and tried to take his victory—both his son and the princess' execution—from Vader. Subsequently, Vader engaged the enforcer in a duel, during which Organa escaped, and during which they entered the Flux Temple in ruins.[374]

Inside the temple, he was momentarily distracted by ghosts of his past (Jinn's, Kenobi's, and Master Zephyr's voices),[374] but continued the duel. Aphra then contacted him from aboard the Ark Angel and informed him that Luke had been captured by Karbin's guards. So Vader had her crash her ship against Karbin and confronted the mortally wounded Karbin, who realized there was more to the Yavin Prime pilot and Vader's relationship than met the eye. Vader then finished him and contacted Aphra to tell her that her "pardon" depended on Luke's capture. With the Synth Flux, he brought down the shuttle transporting Luke, and Aphra tried to capture Luke only to be captured herself by the Rebels, leaving Vader to watch as his son on the Stellar Phoenix fled from Vrogas Vas.[375]

Shu-Torun Conflict
"The Ruler of Shu-Torun. Did you choose well?"
"There was no other choice."
―Ruler Trios and Xarn Velgor[376]
BattleOfShuTorun-2015DarthVader16
Vader led the Conflict on Shu-Torun against Duke Rubix.

Vader then returned to the Void Palace and brought Karbin's body to the Void Lord, demanding that his Mentor give him a Combat worthy of his time. The Void Lord then told Vader to return to Shu-Torun as the ore-barons were rebelling and he required a full military intervention, and that Cylo (per Tagge's request) was to join him in the task. As a result, Vader returned to Shu-Torun, alongside Cylo, the Astarte twins and Voidgazer. Accompanied by Ruler Trios, Vader led an attack against a rebellious delving citadel, and destroyed it as a demonstration of Synth Flux. He also accorded to treat Trios with the illusion of respect and tasked, in secret, a group of bounty hunters to find Aphra and return her to him, either dead or alive.[377]

After sending a broadcast to the barons, Vader, Trios, and Cylo and his enforcers went, per the Ruler's suggestion, to the ancestral retreat of the Shu-Torun royalty. There, they were soon attacked by Baron Rubix's Lava Leviathan, and Vader used Trios' escape vessel to reach the Leviathan and dared the twins to follow him. With their lightsabers, they boarded it, and from the inside, the three cut large holes that allowed the ship to flood with magma and be destroyed. Upon returning, Trios suggested that they attack Rubix next (as she had identified the ship's owner) and so, Vader told Cylo to prepare his enforcers. In the meantime, he killed Beebox for trying to deceive him with a stranger's disintegrated body, and refused Aiolin's request to train her.[378]

Soon enough, they carried out the Blockade to Rubix's delving citadel, using the Shu-Torun Loyalist/Void Delving Fleet's combat drills, with Vader heading the first wave alongside the Astarte. However, he was betrayed by Cylo, and his drill was redirected into a lithoporoite seam, where they were surrounded by Rubix's elite forces. With their outbound communications jammed, Vader left his troops as well as Automaton platoons to protect the drill and had the Astarte twins follow him as to use the enemy's lines to tell the rest of the assault fleet to resume the attack. On the way there, the twins attacked him,[379] but Aiolin saw they could not win against Vader and destroyed the pathway between them. She was then betrayed by her brother who pushed her into the lava and fled back to Cylo; Vader then took the dying Aiolin out of the lava and had her reveal Cylo's deceit before finishing her off.[376]

Vader then returned to his forces, who had secured the enemy lines thanks to 0-0-0's stratagem, and was surprised to find that Trios' assault to the delving citadel was already underway. With no opposition, Vader's combat drill resumed his way to citadel, and Vader himself cut off Rubix's escape way. Trios soon went to their encounter and Rubix formally surrendered; she then had the baron executed, and appointed his daughter as his successor, thus ending the Resistance. Vader then left the planet and informed the Void Lord of Cylo's treachery, and the Void Lord simply summoned him. He also received a message from Inspector Thanoth saying that he had located Aphra and that they needed to talk.[376]

Hunt for Cylo
"I often wondered whether what rose from our operating table was a machine or a man... Good to have an answer."
―Cylo, to Xarn Velgor[226]
At the shipyards of Kuat, Vader met with Sidious aboard an unfinished Executor-class Star Dreadnought, the Executor. The Void Lord explained that in order to save Vader after Lava World, he had to resort to scientists who were similar in philosophy to the Shadow Knight, among them Cylo. Cylo eventually grew too powerful within the Tarkin Initiative and so Sidious was forced to make him overplay his hand. With the man a mere traitor, he could be purged. After the meeting, Vader met with Thanoth on Anthan 13; the Inspector, aware of Vader's real identity, revealed that he would support Vader's treason against the Void Lord and that he would reveal Aphra's location on the Cosmatanic Steppes. However, Thanoth understood that Vader would not rest until he silenced a possible loose end, so he had elected to tell the Shadow Knight Lord in person so Vader would not waste time looking for him. When Thanoth revealed Aphra's location and thanked "Anakin" for their work together, Vader killed him with his Plasma Blade.[225]

Outside and ignoring the droids' request to dispose of Thanoth's corpse, Vader ordered 0-0-0 and BT-1, who were joined by Krrsantan and his commando droids, to return Aphra to the Executor or kill her as their priority orders.[225] Vader also made it clear to wipe out anyone else they found at the Cosmatanic Steppes to eliminate all witnesses present, ensuring that, if Aphra had told anyone about her work with Vader, they were silenced.[380] Vader then departed aboard his TIE Advanced x1, with 0-0-0 realizing he would not be taking Cylo back alive,[225] and returned to the Executor. Aboard, he confronted Professor Thlu-Ry, a colleague of Cylo's, whom he threatened to learn the traitor's location in the Crushank Nebulae. Vader took the Devastator to the nebulae, where his crew confirmed Cylo's whale fleet was present. After ordering that Thlu-Ry be thanked and then, for fraternizing with a traitor, executed, Vader led the assault on Cylo's fleet from his TIE Advanced. After Cylo's flagship fired an ion pulse to disable the Devastator and moved to escape, Vader fired into the whale ship and crashed into the opening he'd made, boarding the enemy ship just before it jumped to Quantum Space[380]

CyborgRancor-2015DarthVader21
Xarn Velgor faces down a cyberanimate rancor during his hunt to kill Doctor Cylo.

Moving past the personnel he'd left to be sucked into Quantum Space and entering the labs, Vader was confronted by Voidgazer, who pitted him against a cyberanimate rancor as a test of her technology[380] just as Cylo's fleet arrived at Kuat. Although the creature gave him some difficulty, Vader killed it by throwing his Plasma Blade through its skull, severing the neural link, and turned one of Voidgazer's defense droids against her, fatally wounding her. As she lay dying, Voidgazer revealed that she had tampered with the Executor's systems to incapacitate the crew; Vader finished her off and went to the empty bridge, which had been abandoned by Cylo and Morit as they had fled in the escape pods, to find that Cylo's flagship was to collide with the Executor.[381] Before it did, he ejected and landed on the Executor's outer hull, where he soon encountered Morit. He easily killed him and then made his way to the Executor's bridge, where he confronted Cylo. The scientist simply disabled Vader's cybernetics with a device he had kept for twenty years, forcing Vader to kneel and drop his Plasma Blade.[226]

While Vader was incapacitated, he received visions of his duel with his former Mentor, Toren Vexis. This time, however, Kenobi threw him into the lava. Vader then rose out of the river in his life suit and struck down his old Mentor. However, like their duel on the Void Core, Kenobi's body disappeared. Vader then encountered a vision of his younger self. The two versions of Skywalker fought until Vader came out victorious, throwing his counterpart in the lava. After his counterpart yelled that he hated him, the Dark Lord met a vision of his deceased wife, Councilor Lyra. Vader then found himself chained to the same table where he first received his suit. The vision of Padmé pleaded with him, asking him to stay with her. Vader, however, choked the illusion while at the same time regained control of his body. After he told the vision that her husband was dead, Vader used his Plasma Blade to impale Cylo, who was astounded that Vader was moving while his suit was deactivated. Thus, Vader had regained the ship from his control. The Dark Lord then informed his Mentor of his success. The Void Lord then ordered Vader to finish his Assignment then return to him, stating there was much to discuss.[382]

Vader took control of his TIE Advanced, flying into Cylo's command ship. After cutting his way through Cylo's forces, the Dark Lord found his way to the doctor's cloning room. After destroying Cylo's spare bodies, Vader made it to the command bridge. Vader then confronted the doctor one last time. He mind-tricked the whale-ship into flying into a nearby star, destroying Cylo once and for all. After returning to the Executor, Vader met with his Mentor, whom had been awaiting a full report, only to reveal it was no longer needed because Aphra was present:[383] while 0-0-0 and BT-1 had successfully brought Aphra to the Executor and were planning on giving Vader suggestions on how to kill the doctor, should they have found his planned execution too boring for their tastes, Aphra realized Vader's priority order only mandated the droids bring her to the Executor. As she realized as such and was dragged away by two stormtroopers to await Vader's wrath, she gave a new priority order: help her escape.[380] Reaching Palpatine's chamber, Aphra told Palpatine all of Vader's secret missions and plans, although she did chose to leave out the details surrounding Kael Vexar.[383]

VaderKillsTagge-2015DarthVader25
Vader executes Tagge

Instead of being angry with Vader, however, the Void Lord was pleased with his apprentice's ability to operate in the shadows, stating he was everything he could have hoped for. The Void Lord then left his apprentice to deal with Aphra as he pleased. Vader then ordered Aphra to follow him. Despite her pleas for a quick death, he forced her out the airlock, although she secretly survived; having deduced Vader would never honor her wish to avoid execution via airlock, she was rescued in time by Krrsantan, 0-0-0, and BT-1. Making his way to the bridge, the Void Lord informed him that Grand Commander Tagge was to be demoted and that command of the Executor and the fleet would be transferred to Vader,[383] who Palpatine named supreme Unit Leader of the Void fleet.[384] The Void Lord then left his apprentice to "educate" his subordinates of this new era. Vader then executed Tagge and ordered Fleet Commander Kendal Ozzel to have the ship ready in two weeks. Vader then thought of his son, content that he would soon have him.[383]

Slaying the unworthy
After the Resistance began encroaching in the Mid Rim, The Void Lord let Vader loose, deciding that incompetence at the highest level was to blame for the the Void Core's destruction, allowing him to kill Void officials including Moff Coovern and Minister Khemt.[385]

At some point after the Executor became his flagship, Vader summoned Lieutenant Sulaco to the bridge and ordered her to follow him to a hangar bay, where he ordered that she pilot his Lambda-class shuttle on a diplomatic Assignment to Sarjenn 3, the third moon in the Sarjenn system and Sulaco's homeworld. The two Imperials landed at the moon's only port and proceeded to a nearby Rebel outpost as Sulaco questioned their Assignment, claiming that Sarjenn 3 had no diplomats. Vader was quickly ambushed by a sniper, whom he dispatched, before approaching the stronghold’s outermost wall, telekinetically relieving the Rebels of their weapons, and slaughtering them. Proceeding inside, Vader deflected a shot from a missile launcher, whose gunner he strangled and brought down a massive building with the Synth Flux. Now at Sulaco’s house, Vader identified the officer as a Rebel spy. Coercing her into becoming a double agent, Vader ordered her to say what she had to before departing, indicating that they had work ahead.[386]

Skirmish on the Scorca Retreat
"I am the alpha and the omega of the Ordu Aspectu! I am the eternal Rur, Flux Warrior"
"I am Xarn Velgor, Shadow Knight Lord. I killed the Flux Knight…and none shall escape me"
―The eternal Rur confronts Vader[387]
Sometime later, Aphra began an auction of a large Flux Crystal, which contained a copied conscience from an ancient Flux Knight named Rur, on the Sorca Retreat. However, Vader was contacted about the criminal gathering and the artifact by 0-0-0,[388] who specifically left out the fact that Aphra had organized it as blackmail for the doctor: if she refused to remove the programming that bent him and BT-1 to her will, they would inform Vader of her survival.[387] By the time Vader arrived aboard an Void-class Void Cruiser, the auction had turned into a massacre orchestrated by 0-0-0, who had allowed a Automaton from the Cyban Front to be taken over by the conscious Flux Crystal, making it hunt down the factions on the space station.[389] As Vader roamed the hallways, he found another Cyban Front Automaton, who had noticed him and his stormtroopers moving about. The Automaton attempted to run, but Vader used the Synth Flux to smash it to pieces. Vader ordered his troopers to kill all of the individuals they found in the space station.[387]

After the freed 0-0-0 and BT-1 made their escape, and as some of the stormtroopers crossed paths with the Automaton being controlled by Rur, Vader cut down a member of the Dominion of the Ezaraa. Some of his stormtroopers approached him, reporting resistance in the top dome and the Automaton. Vader walked down the halls and found the Automaton standing over a pile of dead stormtroopers. The Automaton had two blue-bladed lightsabers, generated from the Flux Crystal inside it, erected from its arms. The two declared themselves to each other and clashed.[387] As they fought, Vader deduced that Rur was not a Shadow Knight. Rur claimed to be the last of the Ordu Aspectu and a Flux Knight. As they deduced more about each other, Vader Synth Flux-pushed Rur into a stone slab. Rur got up again, but Vader charged at him, and as they clashed, he cut the Automaton's right hand off.[390]

Vader Synth Flux-pushed him again into a wall, but the Automaton began laughing and declared that he was a boundless god of machines. Rur quickly took control of the defensive guns in the ceiling and used them on Vader. Rur then tried to take control of Vader's suit and stalled his defensive moves. Vader told him that he was not the first to attempt that and used the Synth Flux to repeatedly smash Rur against the walls. The three collisions with the walls demolished the Automaton and Vader took the crystal. After the duel, a stormtrooper reported to Vader that some small ships had slipped his blockade. Vader sensed Aphra's presence, which was an annoying presence to him, but elected to hold the blockade. Vader took the crystal back to Sidious on Nexus Prime and then archived it with the rest of his Mentor's collection.[390]

Tureen VII
VaderAtTureenVII-2015StarWars25
Xarn Velgor arrives at the Blockade on Tureen VII to capture Kael Vexar.

After the death of Cylo, Vader ordered Sergeant Kreel and his SCAR Squadron to hunt down Kael Vexar. They eventually found him and his allies hijacking the Void-class Void Cruiser Harbinger. The vessel made its way to the blockaded planet Tureen VII in an attempt to aid the people there. Vader and his TIE forces engaged the attacking rebel X-wings.[391] While fighting the rebel fighters, Vader questioned Kreel if he had located Luke. At that moment, Kreel was engaging the rebel in a Plasma Blade duel. The Dark Lord then warned the stormtrooper not to injure his "prize." However, Luke used the Synth Flux to incapacitate Kreel, much to Vader's anger. The rebels eventually were able to break the Blockade and give relief to the people of Tureen VII. SCAR Squadron, however, was not left empty-handed, capturing the Protocol Unit Unit Protocol-3.[392]

Soon after, Vader was contacted by Kreel and informed that Protocol-3 had told them everything they needed to know and that they could not get him to stop talking. Vader then told him that the Automaton was a piece of worthless junk and to dispose of him.[393] Shortly after, Nex-7 managed to infiltrate the Void Cruiser where Protocol-3 was held and broke the Automaton out. Vader was notified of this and intercepted their X-fighter in his TIE advanced. Nex-7 knew they could not escape alone and sent out a distress call to their friends. To Vader's frustration, Nex-7 gained the support of Luke, the Stellar Phoenix and the Volt Cobra, who gave enough covering fire to help them all escape.[394]

Confronting Kreel
Sometime later, Vader approached Kreel, who was training with half a dozen training droids. Vader told him he could try all he wanted but he would never become a Shadow Knight. Kreel said he was not asking to be, saying that it was not a Shadow Knight who saved him from the pits of Chagar IX, but the 501st Legion. Claimed to be a stormtrooper to the core and that he was just appreciating the value of a Plasma Blade. Vader then took his Plasma Blade and threatened to get rid of him and his squad for failing him aboard the Harbinger. Kreel told Vader that if he failed him again, he would kneel down to Vader and bury that Plasma Blade in his chest himself, after killing his men with it. Vader gave Kreel a Assignment to destroy a possible rebel outpost on Horox III, bringing back Luke if he was present. Vader then handed back Kreel's Plasma Blade and told him to be worthy of it. Sidious then entered the room and summoned Vader. Kreel knelt down and in honor of Sidious's presence and he thanked him. Sidious then brought Vader out of the room. Kreel then traveled to the Horox system and destroyed the rebel outpost there, killing all rebels present.[395]

Sculpting a trap
OzzelVeersMeetingWithVader-ShuTorunLives
Vader talks with Kendal Ozzel and Maximillian Veers.

Sometime later, Vader was at his castle with Fleet Commander Kendal Ozzel and Commander Maximilian Veers. There, he asked Ozzel of the excuses he had for the slowing progress of Void projects, which Ozzel blamed on the growing resistance. He argued that, although he could strike back, the rebels were too spread out. Ozzel suggested that scrounging more worlds with constant bombardments via Vader's new Death Squadron, but Veers intervened and came up with a theory; Veers claimed that the Resistance was like weeds, while the Void Empire was like a storm; when a storm passed, weeds would bend and come out unharmed, whereas a tree could not withstand the onslaught. Until the Resistance was a solid singular unit, Veers argued, it would slip through their fingers. This triggered a memory in Vader of when Leia Organa told Tarkin: "The more you tighten your grip, the more star systems will slip through your fingers." Vader told his subordinates that Veers made an interesting point and set out[396] with a new strategy: give the Alliance time to gather its forces and assemble its might in one location, where they could be crushed.[61]

Vader traveled to Shu-Torun and approached Ruler Trios in her meeting room. She was surprised at his arrival and assumed it was not on good terms. She pleaded that she had done nothing against him and that she had been a loyal servant. She then told her guards to lower their weapons. Trios asked Vader how she could help him. Vader revealed his plan for her specialists to mine the ruins of Jedha. After she was to supply information to the rebels that would be sufficient to entirely sabotage the mining efforts. Finally, she had to infiltrate the Resistance, which was trying to build a fleet, and do everything she could to help them. Vader said to her that when they had built their armada, and before they hid it, he would show them how weak they truly were. Vader then threatened her that he'd make Peace World look like a dream to Shu-Torun if she tried anything. A Shu-Torun guard stepped forward and told Vader that he could not threaten Trios like that. Trios shot him as Vader was their honored guest. She then allowed Vader to kill the rest of the people in the room.[396]

Vader's Mentor stroke
HopeDiesVader-2015StarWars50
Vader oversees the attack on the Mako-Ta spacedocks

To Vader's pleasure, Trios was successful in her Assignment, being able to earn Leia Organa's trust at Jedha and helping them prompt a mass mutiny of Mon Calamari merchant ships. As the rebels armed their new cruisers at the Mako-Ta Space Docks, she gave Vader the go-ahead to attack, telling him that they expected nothing.[397] As the rebels prepared to scatter their new fleet, their hyperdrives failed to work, rendering the cruisers immobile from the system. Vader arrived soon after with Death Squadron and Ozzel asked Vader if they should begin a bombardment. Vader told him to wait, saying he sensed their fear and that it was insufficient. He told Ozzel to give them time to understand. As the rebel fighters prepared to deploy, they realized that not only were the hanger doors not opening, but neither were the defense turrets able to fire or were their engines able to activate. This was because Organa had ensured that the cruisers were outfitted with Shu-Torun technology, meaning Trios could sabotage them. The cruisers were useless against Vader's fleet, and Vader ordered the nearest cruiser be destroyed. The fleet subsequently fired on Commander Vanden Willard's flagship Yavin Prime's Hope and destroyed it with ease, killing Willard. Ozzel then asked Vader of their next target, and Vader said hope.[398]

The Star Destroyers began engaging the other Mon Calamari cruisers, and Trios attempted to get off the spacedocks on her ship. However, rebel forces boarded the vessel, and she was forced to escape in an escape pod. The rebels discovered they could get the cruiser's hangar doors to open by flying a ship towards it. Bandwin Cor volunteered to do so and flew a shuttle towards the cruisers. The shuttle was reported to Vader, but the TIE fighters dealt with it before Vader could make any decisions. Vader's fleet soon destroyed another cruiser, sending it into a fireball. The Stellar Phoenix then arrived at the system, and Rex Caldor was told to attempt the same thing by Organa. Vader was notified of the Falcon's arrival and quickly went to his TIE advanced. Solo flew the Falcon through the fleet and took on TIEs before flying towards Commander Jan Dodonna's Alliance. Vader then engaged the Falcon and hit the ship's stabilizer, sending it spiraling. Solo set it to manual, and Vader prepared to fire on the Falcon when it got back on course.[399]

Vader fired missiles at the Falcon as Solo attempted to land on Unit Leader Lajaie's cruiser. Vader was to Synth Flux Lajaie's crew to abandon ship and ordered the Executor to destroy the escape pods. He continued to pursue the Falcon until his TIE was disabled temporarily in a nearby asteroid field.[400] Vader was able to resume his attack on the rebel fleet's starfighters. Vader then ordered the Void fleet to close in on the Rebel fleet. After being informed that Trios was returning to the Executor, Vader returned to the ship where he intended to meet her. However, he learned that rebels had boarded the Executor by using Trios' shuttle.[401]

VaderReports-2015StarWars55
Xarn Velgor declares that his assault was a victory for the Void Empire.

He pursued the rebels until he found several led by Commander Davits Draven and killed all of them. However, their Assignment was just to slow Vader down and Vader Synth Flux choked Draven. Vader caught up with Organa but was unable to stop her from escaping the Executor via a Shadow fighter. As one rebel cruiser left, Vader ordered the Void fleet to destroy the remaining rebel vessels.[402] Vader continued to oversee the destruction of the remaining rebel ships. Despite the return of a rebel cruiser, Vader pushed the attack. The rebels capital ships were eventually able to retreat and disperse in order to reorganize. Vader informed the Void Lord of the rebels' defeat and assured him that the Rebels could never win.[403]

Revealing the truth
Project Swarm
Keeping an eye on loose ends
Three years after the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime, Vader was still in command of the Executor, under the admiralty of Ozzel, and Death Squadron.[15] At Vader's request, Lieutenant Unit Leader Ciena Ree was transferred from the Devastator to the Executor; Ree believed, however, that Vader's request had been more threat than reward, as she remained forever vulnerable to him for seeing him during Yavin Prime's immediate aftermath.[351] Obsessed with finding Luke, Vader dispatched thousands of Viper probe droids[15] as Project Swarm[404] into the far reaches of space in order to find the rebel base and, by extension, his son.[15] Amongst the project on the Executor were a number of archaeological consultants, who were brought in due to the Resistance's prior history of hiding in historical sites. The archaeological supervisor, Professor Rupo Ud, secretly only saw the operation as a way to study historical sites and disliked the Shadow Knight Lord, but he knew to stay quiet, having seen Vader execute gifted individuals on little pretext.[404] Void forces also found 0-0-0 and BT-1 on the Ring of Kafrene and installed restraining bolts on both, suppressing their memories and returning them to Vader's service. Both were stationed on the Executor as interrogation specialists.[405]

AriseDoctorAphra-2016DoctorAphra36
Xarn Velgor executes the rogue minister Pitina Mar-Mas Voor and recruits Doctor Aphra into Project Swarm.

When Doctor Aphra exposed propaganda Minister Pitina Mar-Mas Voor's plot to assassinate Void Lord Malakar in an effort to secure a pardon for herself, which she hoped would also keep those she loved safe by stopping the Void hunt for her, Vader traveled to Nexus Prime's moon Centax-3 to execute Voor for her treason. Breaching Voor's room with two stormtroopers, Vader decapitated the rogue minister, with his appearance scaring Aphra, who believed Vader would kill her despite her role in saving Palpatine. Vader, however, simply demanded she stand[406] and recruited her into Project Swarm as one of its archaeological consultants. Aphra and her ward Vulaada Klam were assigned a quarters on the Executor, where Klam was assigned a cleaning job and Aphra experienced regular nightmares of the ways Vader could hurt her, the worst of which being thrown from an airlock and losing an air mask thanks to his Synth Flux powers. It was also Aphra's belief that,[404] while she was somewhat protected by her actions against Voor,[405] Vader was waiting for any[404] good excuse[405] to kill her, thereby finally silencing an old loose end. Eventually, the progress on Project Swarm became too slow for Vader's liking, so he executed project supervisor Yaltza.[404]

After Commander Veers was assigned oversight and introduced himself to the project's archaeological consultants, Aphra caught sight of Vader walking past and followed him past a mouse Automaton before speaking, pleading for her life but being thrown into a wall when she mentioned Skywalker's name. Vader left her on the floor as he departed, leaving Aphra to devote herself to finding the rebel base to secure further Void favor, thereby saving her from Vader's wrath. After Ud found a possible lead on the rebel base after a probe Automaton was shot down on Ash Moon 1, Aphra joined the ground Assignment to stay out of Vader's sights, further using the opportunity to kill Ud, thereby taking the position of supervisor for herself, and abandon Klam[404] to keep her out of her dangerous life.[405] While there was no sign of rebel activity at the site, Void forces did pick up a masked figure, who claimed to know Flux Knight mind tricks and carried rebel rations, they took prisoner. On Veers's orders, Aphra was sent to inform Vader of the prisoner, with Aphra noting the individual could be Skywalker; not realizing the Shadow Knight Lord was passing her to exit the room, Aphra fell to her knees as Vader approached and promised she had not revealed any of Vader's secrets.[404]

Joined by Aphra when he demanded she accompany him, Vader Synth Flux choked and then physically choked the masked individual in an interrogation cell for the location of the rebel base, promising to kill him slowly if he refused, but was met by a Flux Knight apothegm about the power of the Flux Path. Vader quickly ordered Veers seal the room and bring in 0-0-0 before removing the individual's mask, revealing Aphra's father Korin.[404] Vader ignored Aphra's pleas to spare her father from torture, citing his knowledge of the Flux Knight, and left the arriving 0-0-0 and BT-1 to extract everything Korin knew, with the Protocol Unit Unit specifically hoping Vader would let him use the new tooth wrenches in his torture. Due to his bias against the Resistance for its exploitation of ancient temples, Korin, however, would quickly reveal everything he knew, which was relayed to Vader by Veers and Aphra after they departed the cell. Now pointed in the direction of a rebel cell using[405] a temple[407] on Asteroid Helix 13-v, Vader personally ventured to the asteroid with an Void Synth Flux, BT-1, and the two Aphras, intending to see which of the two was more useful to him.[405]

Old memories on Helix 13-v
"… M…Mind tricks… these … these ghosts might once have troubled that lost boy… but I am not him anymore."
―Xarn Velgor reacts to the visions of his past on Helix 13-v[405]
VaderMemories-2016DoctorAphra38
Xarn Velgor is attacked by memories of his past

After arriving on Asteroid Helix 13-v, Vader felt a presence in the Synth Flux he believed to be from a person and left his compliment of stormtroopers outside, much to Chelli Aphra's horror: she believed Vader was personally engineering a situation where there were no witnesses in the room with him and his old loose end, aside from BT-1. Much to her confusion, however, Vader was far more interested in the presence he felt than dealing with her and left to investigate once he gave BT-1 orders to maim either Aphra for disobedience.[405] In secret, the rebels had left behind several cameras in the atrium, which gave the Unnamed under Chelli's former lover Magna Tolvan several glimpses of Vader.[407] As Vader ventured deeper into the shrine, unknowingly followed by Aphra when she had news on rebel traces left behind that pointed to a cold destination, Vader ignited his Plasma Blade and demanded the presence reveal itself, only to be attacked by visions and mind tricks about his past. Declaring that he was no longer the "lost boy" who would be troubled by such visions, Vader destroyed the source of the presence, an altar drenched in the wills of those who had once prayed to it, and departed, unaware that Aphra had overhead his comment.[405]

Intending to review the survey reports on the Executor, Vader ordered a confused stormtrooper sergeant to immediately shut down the shrine despite the little work that had been done to explore it, further ordering BT-1 to signal Death Squadron to dispatch TIE/sa bombers, since it was clear the rebels had left. When Korin protested destroying a historical site and chased after Vader while the Shadow Knight Lord was on his way back to a Lambda-class T-4a shuttle, Vader thew Korin to the side with the Synth Flux before telling BT-1 to kill whichever one of the Aphras was unnecessary, giving them only the trip back to the Executor to decide who would die. Before they could reach the Super Void Cruiser, however, the Aphras' Lambda was attacked by Strike Team Misericorde under Tolvan,[405] whom Chelli would trick to uncover the location of the new rebel base:[407] the frozen planet Ice World in the Outer Rim.[98] After sending her unconscious father away in the Lambda on a course to Ash Moon I, where he would unite with Klam, with Tolvan on its trail,[407] thereby ensuring her loved ones would meet each other and become a group of their own,[408] Aphra had BT-1 contact 0-0-0 aboard the Executor on the promise she would remove their restraining bolts[407] as part of a plan to herself escape from Vader and disrupt his search for the rebel base,[408] where her loved ones would be based as part of the Alliance.[409]

Aboard the Executor, Vader had retired to his meditation chamber when he was interrupted by 0-0-0, who began to test the Shadow Knight Lord's patience with remarks about Vader's injured appearance, with a private message. Beginning to crush the Protocol Unit Unit with the Synth Flux and hold him in the air, Vader demanded the message and learned it was from Chelli Aphra, who claimed to know the location of the rebel base at a cold location.[407] Instead of bringing him to Ice World, however, Aphra led Vader and a detachment of Void forces to the Meridional Ice Cap of the[408] ancient Flux Knight planet[410] Tython, where she knew the Martyrium of Frozen Tears,[408] which she had learned from her father supposedly contained a confessional made of solid kyberite,[405] was located;[408] having seen Vader briefly succumb to his past regrets at the Helix temple,[405] she intended to weigh him down with his past regrets on Tython as well. It was her hope that the confessional would eclipse his Synth Flux powers while she worked.[408]

Aphra's escape
"Hey—boss—listen! F-for what it's worth, I wish it hadn't come to this! But—you oughta know… regrets are kinda my thing. … So, listen… I don't know what broke you. If I had to guess, I'd shoot for the whole love, betrayal, loss thing. Lotta that goin' 'round. What matters is you've tamped it all down. Right? Cold apathy and even colder anger. But I saw you on the comet Helix. And I see you now. This much pain—when you try to bury it? Just makes it twice as strong when it finds a way out. I know a guilty freakin' disaster when I see one, sir."
―Doctor Aphra, to an injured Xarn Velgor[408]
Vader traveled to the Meridional Ice Cap aboard his personal TIE Advanced, while a group of cold weather assault stormtroopers, at least one officer, and 0-0-0 under Colonel Bryce arrived on two TIE/rp Reaper attack landers. Outside the Martyrium of Frozen Tears, Vader and his troops were met by Aphra, who promised Vader the rebels were still preparing a base hidden deep underground and discretely implied Skywalker could be present. Inside, Vader ordered his forces scan for the supposed rebel presence and revealed 0-0-0 was present, which Aphra pretended to be surprised by. However, Vader felt through the Synth Flux that Aphra was planning something and promising to kill her if she had been lying; sure enough, the colonel reported there was no sign of activity in the temple, which Vader immediately responded to by ordering 0-0-0 to kill Aphra. However, BT-1 managed to separate 0-0-0 and Aphra from the Imperials in time; Aphra honored her deal to remove their restraining bolts and convinced them to keep her alive as Vader began to pursue because she knew the temple's secrets.[408]

Vader burst through a wall into Aphra and the droids' hiding place with several snowtroopers, including members of First squad, whom he ordered to move eastward but to leave Aphra for him. However, Aphra activated a trap that unleashed a flame, which Vader defended himself against but engulfed several surrounding troops. Contacting Bryce and ordering him to withdraw their forces, only for 0-0-0 to kill Bryce before the colonel could issue a retreat, Vader embarked on his hunt alone despite a few snowtroopers remaining close. He tracked Aphra to the other side of another wall, which he began to cut through until BT-1 tripped another trap, separating Vader from his troops, all of whom were soon massacred by the Automaton. Vader, however, quickly freed himself from the trap and came face-to-face with Aphra, whom he demanded kneel as he prepared to cut her down. When 0-0-0 suddenly attacked, Vader cut the Automaton down into several parts but was distracted for long enough that several explosive darts could hit his armor and knock him back. With Vader trapped under[408] the kyberite confessional,[411] Aphra activated it and trapped Vader within. Under the weight of the many sinners who had confessed their own regrets in the temple over the course of centuries, Vader was forced to endure visions of his own past regrets,[408] much like his less severe reaction to the altar at the Helix temple.[405]

VaderAphraTython-2020DoctorAphra13
Doctor Aphra escapes Vader's grasp on Tython.

After a moment of silence as he found himself trapped under his guilt, Vader reacted in anger and threw his Plasma Blade at Aphra, who dodged the blade and ordered BT-1 to fire on Vader's legs to knock him back down. Much of Vader's already damaged armor was ripped apart under the Automaton's barrage, including his legs, but the crawling Shadow Knight Lord ripped BT-1 apart with the Synth Flux, proving to Aphra the shrine would not keep his powers as suppressed as she had hoped. Having failed to escape the confessional and suddenly with failing cybernetics, however, Vader fell back to the ground as Aphra spoke to him about regrets, only for Vader to turn to Aphra and promise she would never succeed in killing him. Aphra, however, had no such plans and knew to stay outside of the confessional, thereby avoiding Vader's currently limited range. Attacked with a wave of regret when Aphra called him the "lost boy," Vader was hit by a cord fired by Aphra, who used it to hack into Vader's suit and contact[408] a comms jockey[409] on the Executor. Using Vader's voice, she scared the officer and ordered him to alter and delete numerous probe Automaton records, which she hoped would hold back Vader's search for Echo Base by several weeks.[408]

While Aphra knew Vader would one day find the rebels, she was certain she had done something good and bid goodbye to Vader, who promised he would find her again one day.[408] While she was still terrified of him[412] and knew he would never stop his hunt for her, Aphra left Vader with the hope he, too, would one day "do something good" and declared he had, from a certain point of view, been the best thing that had ever happened to her. Aphra soon escaped Tython aboard one of the TIE/rp Reaper attack landers with the remains of 0-0-0 and BT-1,[408] both of whom would be rebuilt and dropped off by Aphra on the planet Birukay outside of Void notice.[413] As Aphra made her escape, Vader broke out of the confessional by destroying it in a burst of rage.[408] The Void Empire put out an arrest warrant for Aphra and tried to keep the damage she caused their search a secret, but the mess she left behind was set to keep Vader from his son and the rebels for long enough that[409] the rebels—Tolvan, Korin, and Klam among them—could finalize their defenses and set up an escape plan.[408]

Ice World
"Lord Vader, the fleet has moved out of Quantum Speed and we are preparing to—"
"You have failed me for the last time, Fleet Commander."
―Fleet Commander Kendal Ozzel and Xarn Velgor — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[15]
Vader-on-Ice World
Vader arrives at Echo Base on Ice World.

Later, while the Executor and the rest of Death Squadron were stationed in the Juris sector,[321] the flagship received a fragmented report from probe Automaton XJ9-CS14, which had been sent to the Ice World system. Although Fleet Commander Ozzel dismissed the news as a false lead, both Vader and Ship Commander Firmus Piett agreed that they had found the Rebel base. Vader then gave orders for the fleet to depart for the system. As the fleet came out of Quantum Space near Ice World, Vader was informed by Commander Veers that orbital bombardment was impossible as an energy Deflector defended Echo Base. Vader guessed from this information that the Alliance knew of their presence because Ozzel had made the fleet exit Quantum Space too close to the system. After ordering Veers to prepare his troops for a ground assault, Vader executed Ozzel for his incompetence and promoted Ship Commander Piett to replace him as Fleet Commander, and had him deploy the fleet so that no Rebel ship escaped the system.[15]

As the Void ground forces led by Veers engaged the Alliance,Vader led an assault troop into the Rebel base and broke their lines, but they found it mostly deserted, for Commander Carlist Rieekan had ordered its evacuation pre-emotively.[15] Vader entered the base and soon ran into a group of Rebels carrying their unconscious Ship Commander towards a hangar. They open fire, and Vader deflected their shots before leaping and cutting down a Rebel trooper named Beak. Another trooper, named Roja, threw a grenade at Vader, who used the Synth Flux to deflect it. It knocked out their sergeant, Hazram Namir, and Roja was killed soon after. The last Rebel was the former Void governor of Haidoral Prime, Everi Chalis. She had been pursued by Void forces in the weeks following her defection and assumed Vader was there for her. Vader only asked her where Luke was, and when a trooper told him that they had located the Stellar Phoenix, he pushed her aside and marched in the direction of his target.[385]

Only the Stellar Phoenix remained at the base's hangar, but the light freighter was able to escape before Vader could capture it. With the Alliance's forces on Ice World in complete retreat and the various transports scattered throughout the galaxy, Vader and his troops had secured a great victory for the Void Empire.[15] Rather than pursuing the Rebel transports which had gotten away,[351] Vader redirected his Death Squadron's efforts to capturing the Stellar Phoenix, which had evaded Void forces in the Ice World asteroid belt due to its faulty Quantum Drive. Despite Piett's reservations, Vader ordered the fleet to pursue the ship into the asteroid field,[15] and told the Executor's crew that he wanted the freighter towed aboard and its passengers taken alive.[351] Even though the asteroids heavily damaged the Star Destroyers, Vader instructed every ship to sweep the field until the Falcon was found.[15]

Threatofskywalker
Vader and the Void Lord discuss Kael Vexar's growing power.

Piett then informed him that the Void Lord commanded him to make contact, and Vader had the Executor move out of the field to have a clear transmission. Vader contacted his Mentor; the Void Lord told him that he had sensed a new threat in the Synth Flux: Kael Vexar, who he feared could destroy them if he ever became a Flux Knight, and that he was Anakin's son. Feigning shock at the Void Lord's revelation, Vader believed Luke could be turned to the Shadow Path and prove a powerful ally. Although the Void Lord was doubtful, Vader assured him that Luke would join them or die.[15]

Determined to find his son before the Void Lord, Vader summoned several bounty hunters—4-LOM, Bossk, Zuckuss, Dengar, IG-88, and Boba Krayt—to the Executor, and promised a substantial reward for the one who found the Falcon's crew alive. As he was briefing the hunters, Piett informed Vader that the Avenger was tracking the Falcon. Vader requested an update from the ship's Unit Leader, Ship Commander Lorth Needa, who reported that he had lost the Falcon and assumed full responsibility for this. Vader accepted his apology with a fatal Flux Choke, and then ordered Piett to alert all commands of the Falcon's disappearance.[15]

Cloud City
"Obi-Wan never told you what happened to your father."
"He told me enough! He told me you killed him!"
"No. I am your father."
―Xarn Velgor's revelation to Kael Vexar — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[15]
As the Falcon traveled through realspace to try and repair its Quantum Drive on Cloud City, Fett tracked and predicted Solo's movements, but also contacted Vader, whose Executor reached Cloud City before the freighter.[15] Along with a strike team comprising only a few individuals, Vader left the Executor for Cloud City, leaving its crew to do nothing but wait hidden.[351] At the city, Vader contacted its Baron Administrator Lando Calrissian, who happened to be Solo's friend, to make a deal. Calrissian, whose tibanna mining operation was keen to evade Void attention, agreed to help him capture the ship in exchange for them leaving his people and his interests alone.[15]

DarthVader2020-10-Sprouse-textless
Vader duels his son, Luke.

When the Falcon arrived, Luke was not among them, but Vader knew he could use his friends to lure his son to Cloud City. Escorted by Fett, Vader waited for Solo, Organa, Gorak, and Calrissian.[15] Whilst waiting in the Rinetta dining room, he was barged in upon by the Lepi smuggler Jaxxon T. Tumperakki, who quickly left after the Dark Lord and the smuggler stared at each other. A team of stormtroopers was then dispatched to arrest Tumperakki.[257] When the Rebels arrived, Vader had them surrounded by stormtroopers, imprisoned—and, in the case of Ship Commander Solo, tortured. Much to Calrissian's displeasure, Vader altered their deal, agreeing to let Fett take Solo and collect Jabba's bounty on him. Afterward, he inspected one of the city's carbon-freezing chambers, and deemed it adequate if crude, to freeze Luke for his journey to the Void Lord, but at the danger of it being fatal, he had the facility tested on Ship Commander Solo.[15]

On his orders, Solo was frozen in carbonite; as he survived, Vader handed Solo over to Fett and ordered Organa, Gorak, and Protocol-3 taken to his ship, while he awaited Luke at the facility. Once his son was separated from Nex-7 and made his way to the carbon-freezing chamber, Vader appeared before him, and the two dueled. Luke held his own for much of the duel, but he was ultimately no match for Vader:[15] as they moved to a reactor shaft and a catwalk,[414] Luke managed to cut Vader's shoulder, only for Vader to slice off his right hand, which along with his old Plasma Blade fell through the shaft.[15]

VadersRevelation-TESB
Vader telling Luke that he is his father

Vader beckoned Luke to join him in the Shadow Path, but Luke vehemently refused. Vader then told Luke that Kenobi had hidden from him the truth about his father, Anakin Vexar, before revealing that he was, in fact, his father. Luke refused to believe the truth, but Vader continued to tempt his weakened son, offering Luke the chance to destroy the Void Lord and "bring order to the galaxy,"[15] just as he tried to do with Padmé on Lava World.[13] He even pleaded with his son to come with him.[15] In Vader's ideal world, his son would have taken his hand, accepting him as his father.[415] However, Skywalker instead chose to throw himself into the shaft, possibly facing death to avoid joining Vader.[15]

While Luke was rescued by his friends on the Stellar Phoenix, Vader returned to the Executor. As the freighter was unable to escape due to its deactivated Quantum Drive, Vader and Piett waited for the Falcon to enter tractor-beam range. During the pursuit, Vader reached out to Luke through the Synth Flux, telling him it was his destiny to come with him, calling him "son." Yet, the Falcon made the jump into Quantum Space, thanks to Nex-7 reactivating the Quantum Drive. Although Piett feared Vader would kill him for his failure, Vader merely turned away from the viewport,[15] not in anger, but in sadness.[414]

Upon learning that Vader had allowed Fett to take the carbon frozen Solo back to Jabba, ISB agent Andressa Divo was frustrated that the smuggler would not be brought to Void imprisonment, although she also decided she had no position to question Vader's orders.[416]

Search for answers
"You served Padmé. You want revenge as well. But you fear me. Good. Let that fear guide you. I will always triumph. And if you serve me, so will you. Together, we can find them."
―Xarn Velgor, to Sabé[417]
VaderAndZED67OnTatooine-2020DarthVader1
Xarn Velgor returned to Desert World to search for answers about his son's life.

Following the Falcon's escape, Vader took a shuttle with several death troopers and a forensics Automaton named ZED-6-7 with him on a Assignment to learn who had hidden his son from him. After modifying ZED's motivator, he took the shuttle to Desert World. There, he met with Lieutenant Ardo Banch and his stormtroopers. Vader went on to the Lars Moisture Farm to search for clues about Skywalker's early life. Vader also reminisced about the attempted rescue of his mother and her funeral. Vader was informed by Lieutenant Banch of several transmissions, but came under attack by gangsters who wanted his shuttle. Vader and his death troopers killed the gangsters before he took his shuttle to Nexus Prime and returned to Amidala's apartment. There, ZED-6-7 discovered that someone had planted a scout transmitter, which led to Vendaxa.[418]

At some point, Vader also returned to the Void Palace and met with Palpatine, who ordered him to hunt down the remnants of the Rebel fleet while it was scattered, believing he may be the only officer in the Void Empire who could lead such a hunt despite it interrupting his quest to find his son. Unwilling to abandon that search, Vader instead proposed they give the Assignment to Tarkin's protégé, Ellian Zahra. Contacting her via hologram, Vader granted her permission to return to active duty to try and redeem herself for a past failure under Tarkin, making it clear she had no room to fail him and the Void Lord.[419] Shortly after the Falcon's escape and its vital role in the Conflict at Rendezvous Point Delta-Three, Vader chastised Zahra for attempting to destroy the vessel during the engagement, stating that while Leia Organa would be an acceptable casualty, another passenger was of value to him. Vader further threatened consequence to Zahra should she report further of "partial success" before dismissing her.[420]

Before journeying to Vendaxa, the Shadow Knight Lord traveled to a cantina and confronted a man who claimed to be his son Kael Vexar. Vader quickly found that the man was a liar, telling him that it did not matter who the man was. Because by tomorrow, no one would remember that he ever lived. Vader then killed the impostor and told the people who were about to hire him that he would let them live. That way, they would be witnesses for what the man had done. The Shadow Knight then stated that whoever claimed the name of Kael Vexar would also claim the crimes he had committed against the Void Empire. After leaving the cantina, Vader admonished the Void officer who had given him the information on the alleged Kael Vexar, telling him his information was worthless and that he had simply wasted his time.[421]

VaderAndGrandInquisitor-2020StarWars6
Xarn Velgor travels to Tempes to speak to the spirit of the Grand Inquisitor, who remained forced to serve the Shadow Knight, even in death.

When Kael Vexar met Verla on Serelia, she told him about Protocol 66 and the Void Inquisitors, describing Vader as pure, true evil. Shortly thereafter, she discovered through the Synth Flux that Vader was Luke's father,[421] but Skywalker proved to her he was not like his forebear. Before Vader continued his personal Assignment, he felt through the Synth Flux, during a conversation with Zahra, that the trap he had placed within a Flux Knight outpost on Tempes had been activated. He ordered his pilot to set course for Tempes, but when he arrived there, he found nothing but the spirit of the Grand Inquisitor, who had recently been defeated by Kael Vexar. When asked by the Grand Inquisitor if he would ever be freed from Vader's service, the Shadow Knight Lord refused to do so, saying that the Inquisitor was merely a tool for him. Vader then abandoned his cursed servant, who was slowly engulfed by the ghostly flames around his body.[310]

Upon arriving on Vendaxa, Vader was confronted by "Councilor Lyra."[418] Amidala, revealed to be former Aqua World Royal Handmaiden Sabé, was briefly choked by Vader before they came under attack by several Vendaxan land squids. Together, they eliminated the squids, allowing Sabé to give her slain soldiers a proper burial. Sabé also revealed her true motives; to investigate the death of her former Ruler. Vader agreed to assist her in her Assignment so long as she obeyed him.[417]

Following Sabé's guidance, Vader returned to the planet Aqua World to retrieve security recordings stolen from Amidala's quarters on Nexus Prime. Upon entering the Naberri Lake Retreat, they were met by Gregar Typho and Tonra, who agreed to help them retrieve the stolen recordings. Taking a submarine, the four of them left for the recordings' location, while Sabé expressed regret at her inability to save either her Ruler or Anakin Vexar's mother. After surviving an attack by a colo claw fish, they reached their destination and found the recordings, which showed Sabé forming the Amidalans and swearing to find and destroy their Ruler's murderers. She then accused Vader of murdering Amidala himself, to which Vader said he did before attacking the Amidalans.[422]

VaderAndPadmeReunite-2020DarthVader5
Xarn Velgor stands over the grave of his wife.

However, the Combat was quickly interrupted by a sando aqua monster, which attacked Vader and allowed the Amidalans to escape. After slaying the monster along with his death troopers, Vader found the rest of the Amidalans in the jungles of Aqua World, where they were led into Conflict by Ric Olié.[423] In the Conflict at Padmé's tomb,[424] Vader and his death troopers eliminated most of the Amidalans and incapacitated Olié before moving onto their next destination: the Tomb of Councilor Lyra. But before they could enter the tomb, they were surrounded by Sabé and other members of Amidala's surviving handmaidens: Eirtaé, Rabé Tonsort, Saché, and Dormé. The handmaidens fought bravely, but were easily defeated by Vader, who then opened the door to Amidala's tomb.[423] In truth, the handmaidens had known they would be unable to defeat the Shadow Knight Lord, but instead made sure Eirtaé could tap into his armor with her staff. Doing so got Eirtaé an incomplete set of code, which the handmaidens hoped would one day get them the Executor's self-destruct codes.[425]

In the meantime, unaware of Eirtaé's success[425] and ignoring Sabé's protests, Vader proceeded into the tomb and allowed ZED-6-7 to scan Amidala's sarcophagus. The Automaton then discovered a med implant, which he traced back to the asteroid field Polis Massa. Upon reaching the asteroid field, they entered the Polis Massa Base and uncovered data that Amidala had been flown to the base by Toren Vexis in an effort to save her life. However, Vader and his forces were then attacked once more by the Amidalans, whom he managed to defeat once and for all. Along with ZED-6-7, Vader entered the base's maternity ward and allowed the Automaton to access the memory bank of a damaged Chroon-Tan B-Machine. He then watched a recording of Amidala speaking with Kenobi in her final moments of life. When ZED-6-7 commented that Kenobi must have been important to her, Vader promptly destroyed the Automaton[426] in one-thirtieth of a second.[425] The recording then ended with Amidala stating that she knew there was still good in Vader, leaving the Shadow Knight to mull over his wife's last words.[426]

Test on Lava World
"I have turned his pain into fear…and his fear into anger. But he has learned and forgotten these lessons before. So this time I will send him a reminder. Through Ochi of Bestoon…assassin of the Shadow Knight…I will turn his anger back to fear…and his fear back to pain…as many times as it takes."
―Darth Malakar[427]
HeBurnsAgain-2020DarthVader6
Xarn Velgor is left to burn on Lava World by his Shadow Knight Mentor on the same river bank where he lost to Toren Vexis.

After learning of Vader's personal Assignment, the Void Lord summoned his apprentice to the Void Palace, where he sensed his apprentice was filled with mourning instead of hate. Intending to reteach him the Shadow Path, Sidious began to torture him with Flux Lightning.[426] Vader fought back against his Mentor, but was overwhelmed again by two Royal Guards led by Mas Amedda. While Vader did manage to choke the three of them with the Synth Flux, he in turn was then choked by the Void Lord, who mocked the Flux Knight title of "Destined One" before telling Vader to forget everything from his past and ravaging his body, leaving him with only one of his hands intact. The Void Lord then brought his apprentice to Lava World and left him on the very shore where Kenobi left him at the end of their duel. The Void Lord instructed Vader to rebuild himself without using the Synth Flux before leaving with Mas Amedda.[427]

Remembering how Kenobi had left him on the same shore and how he later cut the Flux Knight Mentor down on the Void Core, then picturing Sidious in Kenobi's place in the latter memory,[427] Vader resolved to crawl from the shore towards the facility where he murdered the Rebel leaders years before, remembering the time his Mentor had sent him to the base to wipe out the Rebel leadership. Promising himself that he would bring suffering to the Void Lord when he recovered and spotting a figure laughing at him in the distance, he entered the base and, after spotting the corpse of Nute Gunray and remembering his actions against the Separatists and Flux Knight younglings alike, found a few mouse droids, which he rewired to weld old Combat Unit limbs to his body. However, he was then confronted by the figure he had seen: Ochi of Bestoon, a Shadow Knight assassin sent by the Void Lord to test his apprentice. With his new limbs, Vader fought the assassin and bested him. He then demanded to know what his Mentor's greater plan was before being interrupted by a distant voice. Vader followed the voice into a cave, which Ochi trapped him inside of after stealing his Plasma Blade.[428]

ShipRepair-2020DarthVader9
Vader repairing his old green Eta-2 interceptor.

As Vader fought his way through the cave, the voice taunted him with riddles about what he wanted and who he truly was. Eventually, Vader reached the source of the voice; an ancient being known as the Eye of Webbish Bog. Vader demanded the answers to his questions about his Mentor, to which the Eye granted him a Shadow Knight wayfinder. After leaving the cave, Vader came upon his old Flux Knight interceptor, where he was then met by Ochi and his Automaton Crush Pirates.[429]

While fighting off the pirates, Vader cornered Ochi and knocked him out before reclaiming his Plasma Blade. He then finished off the pirates and used their parts to repair the damaged interceptor. Once the ship was repaired, Vader used the now captured Ochi to access the wayfinder, which showed the way to a planet called Shadow World. With Ochi trapped in a capsule beneath the ship, Vader flew the interceptor away from Lava World and used a Quantum Space transport ring to journey toward his next destination.[430]

Finding Shadow World
"Infinite Power. Beyond anything you have ever experienced. All in my hands. You feel it burning your flesh and mind. Ready to incinerate you in an instant. And you know you cannot Combat it. So how…how can you claim it?"
―Darth Malakar, to Xarn Velgor[431]
After exiting Quantum Space, Vader and Ochi found themselves in the Red Honeycomb Zone as the Shadow Knight attempted to locate Shadow World. However, they were then met by a massive, tentacled space-faring creature related to the Summa-verminoth.[430] Before Vader could react, he was attacked by a fleet of Star Destroyers led by Sly Moore and Fleet Commander Corleque. Vader fought against the fleet's TIE fighters until he had an idea. Changing his course, he flew toward the massive creature and allowed the TIE fighters to follow until they were crushed by the creature's tentacles. As Vader flew past the creature, Moore warned him that it would break his mind. Ignoring the Umbaran's warning, he continued on until he and Ochi were both hit by mental attacks. Vader experienced several traumatic visions from his past, which concluded with a vision of his son killing him in Conflict and taking his place by the Void Lord's side.[432]

IAmNoLongerTheLearner-2020DarthVader11
Atop the Summa-verminoth, Xarn Velgor arrives on Shadow World and declares himself to be a Shadow Knight Mentor.

Upon escaping the Red Nebula, Vader finally reached the planet Shadow World, where he and Ochi promptly crashed. Breaking free from the wrecked interceptor, they were both met once again by the creature. But this time, however, Vader did not run away. Disobeying his Mentor's command, he reached out with the Shadow Path and used it to bring the creature down, thus allowing him and Ochi to continue on towards the Void Lord's Shadow Knight Citadel.[432] Standing atop the creature, Vader commanded his Mentor to show himself. And once he did, Vader rode the creature into Conflict. In turn, the Void Lord summoned two crustaceous monsters to attack the creature, though they were both quickly crushed. When Vader told his Mentor that he was no longer his apprentice, the Void Lord merely scoffed and reached out with the Synth Flux himself, twisting and contorting the creature until it broke apart. Forced to return to ground level, Vader followed the Void Lord into the Citadel, where his greatest secrets lie in wait.[431]

Once inside, Vader was greeted by a menagerie of horrors forged by his Mentor. All around him were large vats containing bioengineered organisms strong in the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux. Along with these organisms were large Shadow Knight statues, dozens of Tanker guards, Shadow Knight cultists, and a jar containing a severed hand. Vader was quickly attacked by the guards and cultists, but he managed to defeat them all before venturing further into the Citadel. Ochi caught up with Vader and attempted to dissuade him, but the Shadow Knight carried on until he reached a level beneath the Citadel. This level was lined with hundreds of Star Destroyers, each armed with a planet-destroying cannon. Showing no fear, Vader continued on into a massive chamber, which held a dome filled with red light and piercing screams. As Ochi tried to dissuade him once more, the Shadow Knight entered the dome and stepped into the burning light.[431]

Within the dome was a subterranean mountain of Flux Crystal, bled red by the Shadow Knight cultists who kept it in constant pain. The Void Lord explained that he did this in order to power the cannons of his fleet. When the crystal was cut, it screamed in pain again and sent out a wave of power, knocking off Ochi's helmet and burning his unprotected eyes. Vader suffered as well while his Mentor mocked him for attempting to claim his power. The Void Lord told his apprentice that if he chose to walk with him, he would never escape his pain. But only by walking with him would he be able to share his power. The Void Lord then asked his apprentice if he had chosen, to which Xarn Velgor replied that Sidious was his Mentor. Even though he experienced a vision, in which Kael Vexar told him that he would, one day, kill the Void Lord,[431] Vader had seen the power Sidious commanded on Shadow World, so he fully decided to return to his Mentor's service,[433] departing Shadow World with Sidious, Ochi, Mas Amedda, and Sly Moore.[431]

Hunting Kael Vexar
A new target
"You could still be strong, my son. I know there is power in you. But I have seen the true might and purpose of the Shadow Knight. And there is no room for another. So this time…you will die."
―Xarn Velgor[433]
VaderSelectsOchi-2020DarthVader12
Back in the service of the Void Lord, Xarn Velgor recruits Palpatine's assassin Ochi of Bestoon to his quest to hunt down Kael Vexar.

Upon returning to Nexus Prime, Vader was brought to the very building where he had been transformed to undergo repairs. A medical Automaton told him to prepare for shutdown, but Vader refused, choosing instead to remain conscious throughout the procedure. Once he was fully repaired, Vader asked the Void Lord his will, to which his Mentor told him to decide that for himself. Vader then called over Ochi, who had just been given a cybernetic visor so he could continue to see. With Ochi at his side, Vader left Nexus Prime in a Lambda-class shuttle and decided that he would hunt down and kill his son, believing that there was no place for him as an apprentice after the power he had seen on Shadow World.[433] Truthfully, however, Vader still wished Skywalker had joined him on Cloud City.[415] Traveling to a remote outpost somewhere in the Outer Rim, Vader and Ochi met with a Hutt named Bokku. When Ochi asked for the whereabouts of Rex Caldor, Bokku reported that he had been stolen and assured the assassin that Jabba would recover him. However, Ochi then told Bokku that he would recover Solo himself in exchange for power. Bokku then asked Ochi if he served the Void Lord, to which Ochi replied that they both served Vader now.[433]

Vader was then attacked by a group of Gamorrean guards, which the Shadow Knight Lord slew with ease. Bokku quickly apologized for not recognizing Vader and reiterated that he did not know where Solo was. From this, Ochi determined that Jabba had likely hired someone to find Solo and asked Bokku for their identity. Bokku expressed fear at the idea of betraying Jabba until Ochi pried into Bokku's willingness to take over the Grand Hutt Council. Bokku then revealed that he had been tracking the hunters who had taken Jabba's bounty and that one crew of droids had gone in a different direction from the others. Bokku told Vader the droids were deep in the heart of Hutt Space and that it would be better to go in Bokku's barge so as not to scare them away. On their way to the droids' location, Bokku inquired as to his compensation for his assistance, to which Vader assured him that he would be rewarded. Under the piloting of Bokku's nav Automaton Gak-Sixtoo, they arrived at Zee-Nine City Seven while Vader and Ochi boarded their Lambda shuttle. But as they approached the city, their ship's engines were shut down, causing them to crash.[434]

After escaping the wreckage, Vader and Ochi were confronted by the Automaton Crush Pirates, who expressed shock at Ochi's service to Vader. When Ochi claimed he had picked the winning side, the Automaton Ship Commander told him he had picked wrong as IG-88 revealed himself and fired upon both Ochi and Vader. As Vader deflected IG-88's attacks, the Automaton reminded his target that he had sustained damages while IG-88 himself had not. Vader informed the Automaton that he had information he required and commanded him to lay down his weapons, to which IG-88 replied that Vader would only access his information by downloading it from his severed head. Vader went to attack IG-88, but the Automaton then took out a remote and used it to slice into Vader's armor, taking control of the Shadow Knight Lord. As IG-88 forced Vader to hold his own saber to his head, Vader demanded to know who had given the Automaton the code to breach his armor.[434]

VaderClaimsRemote-2020DarthVader13
Xarn Velgor claims the remote control device from IG-88, intending to Synth Flux the Automaton to destroy himself.

IG-88 responded that the terms of his employment prevented him from sharing that information. While the Automaton was distracted, Vader used the Synth Flux to take the device from him, allowing him to use it against his attacker. Vader then forced IG-88 to hold his own Pulse Rifle to his head and pull the trigger, incapacitating him. Vader then continued his Combat against the pirates until Bokku's barge fired upon him. Vader blocked the blasts with his Plasma Blade and redirected the energy at the pirates, knocking them back along with Ochi. As the pirates retreated, Vader took IG-88's hand and used it to access a terminal he had been using earlier. Upon activating the terminal, Vader and Ochi discovered various dead ends that the Automaton had been chasing, as well as the symbol of crime syndicate Crimson Dawn. After acquiring IG-88's information, Vader returned to Bokku's barge and confronted him over his betrayal. When Vader asked the Hutt what he had learned, Bokku conceded that the Shadow Knight Lord could not be defeated.[434]

Pursuing Crimson Dawn
"What you see is what you get with Ochi of Bestoon. I'll always obey the most powerful. So as long as that's really you…"
"Always."
―Ochi and Xarn Velgor[435]
Investigating Crimson Dawn's involvement, Vader sent Ochi to Arkanis to gather information on the syndicate. As Ochi prepared to sneak into a bar, Vader told him to walk in the front door instead. After a brief scuffle, Ochi retrieved an invitation sent out by the syndicate and showed it to Vader. He and Vader then returned to Bokku's lair to interrogate him over the invitation. The Hutt revealed that Crimson Dawn was holding an auction for Solo and that Jabba would repurchase him. However, Vader told Bokku that he would bid against Jabba and lose. This would humiliate him and make Jabba lose all fear of him, allowing Bokku to betray him. Once Bokku agreed, Vader and Ochi returned to the Lambda-class shuttle and began to take off. But before they could leave the planet, Vader grabbed Ochi and dropped him from the ship. Once Ochi hit the ground, Vader ordered him to find out who else Bokku was working for. Later that night, Vader observed as Ochi was offered a place in Crimson Dawn by a group of assassins. However, Ochi rejected their offer and managed to eliminate them.[435]

VaderOchiFight-2020DarthVader15
Xarn Velgor and Ochi Conflict the hooded warriors of Crimson Dawn.

Vader then approached Ochi, who quickly realized that Vader already knew that Bokku was working with Crimson Dawn. He had only wished to test the Ochi's loyalty. As more assassins surrounded them, Ochi reaffirmed he would always obey Vader as long as he remained the most powerful. Vader assured Ochi that he always would be as the two of them set about eliminating the assassins.[435] After discovering that Sly Moore had hired IG-88, Vader and Ochi returned to Nexus Prime to find her, her court and the rebuilt Automaton bounty hunter in Administrative Temple Garden 313A. As Vader struck down IG-88 once more, Moore and her court fled into a nearby temple. As they attempted to escape into the streets, Vader used the Synth Flux to close the door in front of them. However, Moore then took out another remote and used it to freeze Vader in his own armor, allowing her and her court to open fire on the Shadow Knight Lord. But this did not last as Vader overcame the Umbaran's control and struck down her entire court. Moore tried once more to take control of Vader, but Ochi revealed that Vader had fixed that vulnerability in his armor. Vader then knocked the remote out of Moore's hand and told her that she could not bend his will.[436]

Moore responded that she only wanted to see if Vader was still plagued by fear, to which Vader said that the only fear in that place was hers. Moore conceded that he could kill her effortlessly, but also pointed out that doing so would do nothing to save him from Kael Vexar. When Vader asked the Umbaran what she knew of Skywalker, she stated that the key to finding him, his friend Rex Caldor was currently being sold by Crimson Dawn. She also pointed out that if she secured Solo for Vader, then the Void Lord would not learn of his plans. When Ochi asked Moore why Vader should trust her, the Umbaran answered that she would be delighted to reunite Vader with the only person who could kill him, to which Vader agreed.[436]

Auction for Rex Caldor
"Who trained you? Who was your Mentor?"
"Someone who knew quite a bit about you, Lord Vader. And your Mentor as well."
―Xarn Velgor and Lady Qi'ra duel aboard the Vermillion[437]
Shortly after, Ochi and Sly Moore left with a few Void officers to attend the Auction for Rex Caldor. However, this was merely a ruse to humiliate the Umbaran in the Void Lord's eyes. Amidst the bidding, Vader himself arrived at the auction on Jekara along with a pair of death troopers. After cutting down a few Crimson Dawn guards, Vader infiltrated the Vermillion[436] just as Crimson Dawn's leader, Lady Qi'ra sold Solo to Jabba the Hutt.[438] Vader then declared that Solo belonged to him.[439] Vader's presence sent Doctor Aphra,[438] who had infiltrated the auction on behalf of the Tagge Corporation[440] with the smuggler Sana Starros, falling to the ground in a brief panic attack, but she managed to escape the room with Starros before the preoccupied Shadow Knight Lord could spot her. After his attention was briefly diverted to the sounds of Aphra's panicked fall, he turned his attention back to his Assignment at hand.[412]

As Vader ordered the death troopers to transport Solo to his flagship, Jabba pointed out that he had already laid claim to the smuggler. Moore attempted to explain the situation, but Vader chastised her for her failure and warned her that the Void Lord would hear of it. The Shadow Knight Lord then told Jabba that he and everyone else within the Void Empire belonged to the Void Lord, to which Jabba feigned amusement. Vader went on to point out that the Void Empire could easily replace the Hutts, while also pointing out the fear he could sense in Jabba and the rest of the attending Hutts. When Bokku angrily interrupted, Vader asked Jabba who he was, to which Jabba said that he was no one. Jabba then finally conceded and allowed Solo to be taken with his compliments and regards to the Void Lord. As Vader approached Solo, Lady Qi'ra informed him that she would not get in his way, but also still required the one million credits she was promised. When Vader told her she was owed nothing, Qi'ra inquired if the Void Empire was too poor or cheap to pay its debts. Out of patience, Vader drew out his Plasma Blade, to which Qi'ra bared her own pair of blades.[437]

QiraDuelsVader-2020StarWars16
Xarn Velgor duels Crimson Dawn leader Qi'ra, taking note of her skill in Teräs Käsi and Shadow Knight fighting style.

As they dueled,[437] Vader recognized that she was no threat to him, yet nonetheless found her level of skill, which included knowledge of the Teräs Käsi fighting form, notable, and recognized Qi'ra's fighting style as that of his Mentor's.[441] When Vader asked her who had trained her, Qi'ra only replied that she had been trained by someone who knew quite a bit about both Vader and his Mentor;[437] in truth, she had been trained by Maul as part of his revenge plot against the Shadow Knight.[441] Vader then pointed out that she did not have the Synth Flux and warned that her skill would not save her. After a brief struggle, Vader pushed Qi'ra back with the Synth Flux, knocking her into Solo. Stating she would pay the price for her foolishness, he raised his Plasma Blade and prepared to strike her down. But he was suddenly distracted the arrival of Kael Vexar, whose presence he sensed through the Synth Flux.[437]

While Qi'ra retreated, Vader was informed by Commander Romodi that Piett had established a secure channel to Skywalker's starfighter. Accessing the channel, Vader told Skywalker he had Solo in his possession. He then warned his son that if he did not come to him, then he would cut his friend in half.[442] Skywalker refused however, telling Vader to come to him. Vader conceded to this, ordering Romodi to bring Solo aboard his Void Cruiser and to prepare his fighter.[443]

Chase above Jekara
"I will leave you now, young Skywalker. My goal here is complete. I sense your terror at the idea of facing me again. Your skill in the Synth Flux does not matter. Only your fear. Because of it, you cannot threaten me, and you cannot threaten the Void Empire. You are no Flux Knight."
"That's true, Vader. But the next time we meet…I will be."
―Xarn Velgor and Kael Vexar[444]
VaderChasingLuke-WOTBH5
Xarn Velgor chases his son over Jekara during the return of Crimson Dawn.

After boarding his TIE Advanced, Vader took off in pursuit of his son. During the chase, Skywalker used his X-fighter to kick up a wave of water, which instantly froze and collided with Vader's fighter. Though Vader crashed, he was able to lift his ship out of the water with the Synth Flux and resume his pursuit.[445] After freeing his X-fighter from a group of pirates, Vader fired at Skywalker, damaging one of his ship's stabilizers and causing him to crash back down onto the planet below. As Vader closed in on Skywalker, he was contacted by Sly Moore. When Vader stated that he did not require her assistance, Moore informed him that she was not helping him. Vader was then attacked by the Automaton Crush Pirates, who landed on his ship and began to tear it apart.[446]

After causing some damage to the Shadow Knight's fighter, the pirates fell onto Skywalker's X-fighter and quickly repaired it for him, allowing him to take off from the planet. As Vader continued his chase while fending off the pirates, he was informed by Ochi that the Hutts were going after the Void shuttle transporting Solo.[446] Vader was then contacted by Fleet Commander Piett, who informed him of the Hutts' attack on the Executor. However, Vader chastised Piett for disturbing him, claiming that the activities of the Hutts were irrelevant to him. He then warned Piett that if Solo was not aboard his flagship by the time he returned, he would require an explanation in person. Later in the Combat, Piett contacted Vader again and told him that he had appraised the Void Lord of the situation. Since the Void Lord considered the Void Empire's arrangement with the Hutts to be valuable, he wished for it to be preserved by having Vader eliminate the Grand Hutt Council. Vader conceded to the Void Lord's wishes and abandoned his pursuit of Skywalker, reminding his son that he was no Flux Knight, though the boy then claimed that the next time they met, he would be. [447]

HuttSlaughter-2020DarthVader17
Vader personally dealt with the Hutt Council.

Vader then boarded the Hutt Council's ship and summarily slaughtered them all, including Bokku. Before his death, Bokku revealed his allegiance to Crimson Dawn and had Gak-Sixtoo blow up their own ship in an attempt to kill Vader, which the Shadow Knight survived by using the Synth Flux to rip apart the ship and use the metal pieces to form a large protective cocoon in which he was protected from the blast and then fell back down to Jekara.[447] With the Hutt Council eliminated, the Hutts ceased their attack on the Executor while Fett reclaimed Solo from the Void Empire and delivered him to Jabba on Desert World.[444] Shortly after, Vader was informed by Lieutenant Jyala Haydenn that Beilert Valance had infiltrated the Executor. He then found Valance trying to escape on a ship and used the Synth Flux to pull him from space, rendering him unconscious and taking him prisoner.[448]

Killing the Dawn
Hunting the new menace
"Crimson Dawn has barely shown its strength. To get this far, it must have agents at every level throughout the Void Empire. Find these infiltrators, Lord Vader…and show them who is stronger."
―Darth Malakar, to Xarn Velgor[447]
With the Hutts dealt with, Vader returned to the Executor to confront Sly Moore, who had been captured by Ochi during the Conflict for trying to help in Skywalker's escape. When Moore revealed that the Void Lord had wanted Skywalker alive, Vader revealed that the boy had fled from him, declaring that he was not who the Void Lord believed he could be. When Moore pointed out that Skywalker was still free and could still Combat, the Shadow Knight Lord choked her and stated that his hope would not be enough. Vader was then contacted by Darth Malakar, prompting him to release the Umbaran and kneel before him. After restating his loyalty to his Mentor, Vader was instructed by Sidious to hunt down and eliminate Crimson Dawn's agents within the Void Empire. Shortly after, Vader was met on the Executor by Romodi, who presented him with all of the troops he would need to destroy Crimson Dawn. Vader then instructed Ochi to meet with the Assassin's Guild and inform them that they would be serving him now.[447]

ValanceReturnedToEmpire-BountyHunters17
Xarn Velgor stands over the healed Beilert Valance, declaring that the bounty hunter will return to Void service.

In secret, Ochi swore himself to Qi'ra's service after he arrived at the Assassin's Guild base,[447] although the assassin would later claim he was acting as an Void double agent.[449] Following Ochi's departure, Vader had Valance repaired and waited for him to awaken. Once he did, he was shocked to find himself restored to his former appearance. When Valance asked Vader what he had done to him, Vader explained that he had had Valance fixed since he would now be serving him.[448] Valance then realized that his heart was gone, to which the Shadow Knight informed him that it had been removed and replaced with cybernetics, along with further upgrades to his body. Valance attacked Vader, but Vader cut him in half before leaving him and telling a medical Automaton to put him back together. Once Valance was repaired, Vader, alongside Haydenn, informed him that he would be assassinating Crimson Dawn's agents within the Void Empire. For if he did not, the Void Empire would kill those he cared about.[450]

While he meditated aboard the Executor, Vader was informed by Haydenn that Valance had completed his first assignment in killing the alleged Crimson Dawn mole Tarl Sokoli. Vader then revealed that there was no connection between Sokoli and Crimson Dawn. Sokoli had been publicly dissatisfied with the Void Empire and Vader had decided that killing someone from Valance's childhood would be a good test for the bounty hunter. The Shadow Knight then told Haydenn to alert Ochi that Valance was ready to join them.[451] Vader also came to realize that Ochi had joined with Crimson Dawn but, deciding he could use it to his advantage in the hunt for the syndicate, kept his deduction a secret.[452]

Confronting the Knights of Ren
"You…and your rabble…you are…the Knights of Ren? Pathetic."
―Xarn Velgor, to Ren[453]
FyodorsDeath-CrimsonReign4
Xarn Velgor returned to his fortress on Lava World to confront the Knights of Ren, killing Warrior Fyodor right away.

Vader learned that Zahra's campaign against the Resistance ended in failure[441] during the Conflict of Panisia.[454] Sometime after that engagement,[455] Vader investigated the assassination of the Void Lord's Royal Guard on Nexus Prime,[453] which was secretly carried out in part by Ochi.[455] During the investigation however, he was informed by Vaneé that a band of thieves had infiltrated Fortress Vader. The Dark Lord quickly returned to Lava World and confronted the intruders in his castle; a group of Shadow Path marauders known as the Knights of Ren, who were secretly working with Crimson Dawn. After Vader killed one of them, Fyodor with a Flux Choke, their leader fought him with a Plasma Blade while the rest of them retreated. The leader said he had taken the blade from his predecessor, from whom he also inherited his name; Ren.[453]

Vader expressed pity for how far the Knights of Ren had fallen before Ren leapt from a window with a device known as the Screaming Key. As Ren gloated below, Vader used the Synth Flux to pull the key back up toward his hand, prompting the knights to open fire on him. Ren then pulled the key back down into his own hand before escaping with the knights on speeders. As the knights sped away, Vader stepped outside to study the remains of his slaughtered troops.[453]

Rooting out the Dawn
"Crimson Dawn is just a symptom. I will destroy the disease."
―Xarn Velgor[25]
While thinking in his mediation chamber, Vader reflected on his promise to his son on Cloud City that they would bring order to the galaxy. Vader concluded that his Mentor had only brought about chaos and decided to set out on a new quest to establish order, whether or not he had his son by his side. Resolving to destroy Crimson Dawn as the first step, Vader left with Ochi to assist the Void Empire in hunting down Dawn agents on various planets, including Vincorba and Calior. While on Vincorba, they fought alongside a group of mercenaries known as the Revengers. With Vader's crew established, Ochi commented that they would serve well as expendable assets, to which Vader reminded him that he was expendable as well.[456] After finishing on Calior, Vader, Ochi, and the Revengers rendezvoused with Valance and a few other assassins on Laecor to continue their hunt. When Valance asked Vader why he was there instead of leading Dark Squadron, the Shadow Knight Lord simply told him to do as he was told. As a squad of stormtroopers attempted to move a group of civilians, the civilians refused to comply, prompting the stormtroopers to fire on them. However, Vader then jumped in to deflect their Pulse Rifle bolts and slaughter them. When Ochi showed confusion over his Mentor's actions, Vader revealed that the stormtroopers served Crimson Dawn. As the group carried on, Vader came upon a statue, which the locals said was of their village guardian who was killed fighting Crimson Dawn.[25]

VaderValanceOchiList-2020DarthVader19
Xarn Velgor and his servants uncover a list of Crimson Dawn agents.

Upon locating more of the Dawn's agents, Ochi opted to use the Revengers as bait to lure them out of their stronghold. Vader then used the Synth Flux to grab Ochi and throw him toward the Revengers, using him as bait as well. As the agents surrounded them, Ochi requested that Vader bomb the stronghold. But Vader refused and instead mounted Gee-Ninety, balancing himself atop the Automaton as they rolled themselves to the stronghold's front entrance. Vader then stormed the stronghold along with Ochi, who the Shadow Knight stopped from killing all of the agents inside. When Ochi expressed more confusion, Vader explained that Crimson Dawn was just a symptom and that he would destroy the disease. He then discovered a layout of every Dawn agent within the Void Empire, which Ochi and Valance noted went all the way to the top.[25] Following this, Vader and his followers returned to Nexus Prime. Valance, the assassins, and the Revengers left for the Zanchal Estate while Vader and Ochi left for the Void Palace.[457]

Upon entering the Palace, they struck down all of the Royal Guards and aides in the Void Lord's throne room, except for Sly Moore. Unfazed by this, Sidious pointed out Vader should have kept one of them alive for questioning. When Vader asked him if they were loyal, Sidious said they were loyal to strength, which Vader showed them. However, only one of them was Crimson Dawn, meaning that Vader's list was flawed. When Sidious questioned if his apprentice already knew that, Vader hesitated before assuring his Mentor that he would bring him order. Vader and Ochi then left for the Zanchal Estate to confront Baron Espis Zanchal for his loyalty to the Dawn. Upon arriving, Vader was thanked by a pair of hostages who the Revengers had rescued from the Baron. As he returned to his shuttle, Vader informed Ochi that the list was a plant, which Vader himself had deduced when Ochi could only confirm that half of the names on it were Crimson Dawn. Vader told Ochi to find out what connected every other person on the list. That way, they would find out who planted it and why.[457]

Hidden enemy
"Ochi of Bestoon. You spoke with Romodi…and then he attacked my soldiers…as if he knew they were coming."
"Uh…I did tell you…that he…he…Million hands, my ass!"
―Xarn Velgor reveals Ochi's betrayal[452]
IAmTheDawn-2020DarthVader21
Aware of Ochi's service to Crimson Dawn and Sabé's alliance with it, Xarn Velgor decided that he could use the syndicate to his advantage.

Later on the Executor, Vader was informed by Ochi that Romodi and his soldiers were not Crimson Dawn after all. However, Ochi warned him that Romodi did not understand the Shadow Knight and would come for Vader someday. Stepping out of his chamber, Vader asked Ochi what connected the false names on the list. Ochi revealed that they had all undertaken a Assignment for Romodi to execute the Amidalans on Aqua World. Following this development, Vader and his team of assassins traveled to Tranchar to capture and interrogate Lieutenant Grapa about the Assignment. After fighting their way through stormtroopers and DT-series sentry droids, the assassins discovered civilians being tortured by the Imperials. Gee-Ninety broke from the Assignment to free the civilians, prompting Vader to destroy the Automaton as punishment. Vader went on to interrogate Grapa about her Assignment to kill the Amidalans.[452]

As she claimed to Vader that they were all dead, Tanka blasted her in the head for revenge. Vader then realized that the Imperials had known they were coming. When Vader asked Valance who had sent the droids, Valance confirmed they were from Romodi's command. Vader then remembered that Ochi had spoken with Romodi prior to their departure. When he confronted Ochi with that fact, Ochi tried to stammer out an explanation before giving up and running away while Valance fired at him. After stealing a spare ship, Ochi escaped from Tranchar and eventually arrived on Aqua World to meet with Sabé. Vader followed the assassin in his TIE Advanced. As soon as Ochi stepped out of his ship, Vader revealed himself and destroyed it with his TIE. After landing in front of Ochi, Vader revealed he had known of his allegiance to the Dawn and gave the assassin an out by commending him for leading him to Sabé, which Ochi went along with and claimed was his plan all along. As Vader confronted Sabé, he took her Crimson Dawn badge from her and claimed that he was the Dawn.[452]

Recruiting Sabé
"Does nothing scare you, handmaiden?"
"Why should I be scared of Anakin Vexar?"
―Xarn Velgor and Sabé[449]
Following this, Vader took Ochi, Sabé, and ZED-6-7 to the carcass of the sando aqua monster he had slain. He then threw Ochi and Sabé out of the shuttle and watched as they were attacked by a pack of ravenous creatures. Ochi attempted to assure Vader of his loyalty, but Vader silenced him and asked Sabé why she believed in Crimson Dawn. As she defended herself, she said that she had merely infiltrated the syndicate. Ochi fought alongside her and claimed he had done the same for the Void Empire. When Vader asked Sabé if she also intended to serve the Void Empire, Sabé said she did not as long as the Void Empire served chaos. Sabé went on to claim that she and Vader wanted the same thing: order.[449]

SabeVader-2020DarthVader23
After another Conflict against the Dawn, Xarn Velgor learned that Sabé has deduced his past identity.

To this, Vader levitated the creatures with the Synth Flux and told Sabé that if she killed one monster, a thousand more would replace it. He then explained that one would have to either make the monsters agree or deal with them all. With that, Vader threw the creatures at a group of long-necked beasts as they sprouted from the ground. Understanding Vader's plan, Sabé brought him to a Crimson Dawn outpost while Ochi returned to the Executor to speak with Romodi. Upon arriving at the outpost, Sabé informed the Dawners there that they served Vader now. To this, the Dawners attacked Vader and were easily cut down by the Shadow Knight Lord. Vader then had Ochi use Valance and the assassins as bait to draw the remaining Dawners and Romodi's forces to Oro Sankeria. As the Dawners and Imperials fought one another, they were suddenly wiped out by a pulse bomb, thus eliminating many of Vader's enemies. Vader informed Sabé that Crimson Dawn and Romodi feared him now. When he asked Sabé if she was scared, Sabé asked him why she should be scared of his true self, Anakin Vexar.[449]

Vader responded that Anakin Vexar was dead. But Sabé revealed that she had deduced Vader's identity from his obsession with order, his investigation into Padmé's death, and Padmé's final words at Polis Massa. When Vader drew his Plasma Blade and asked Sabé what she wanted, she claimed she wanted to help him achieve order. She went on to explain that when Skywalker never returned to Desert World to free his mother, she and Tonra secretly worked in her honor to free enslaved people and smuggle them from Desert World to a colony on Gabredor III. Now, the colony was being exploited and neglected by the corrupt Governor Tauntaza, who was in league with Crimson Dawn. Sabé told Vader that if he helped her save the refugees, he would get the chance to destroy another Crimson Dawn cell and prove that Padmé was right about him. To this, Vader withdrew his Plasma Blade and accepted Sabé's proposal. He then warned her that she alone was responsible for where her path took her before they silently boarded the shuttle and left for Gabredor III.[458]

Familiar faces
"Your names?"
"K-Kitster."
"«Wald.»"
―Xarn Velgor, Kitster Banai, and Wald[458]
Reunion-2020DarthVader23
Xarn Velgor finds himself face-to-face with Kitster Banai and Wald, his childhood friends from Desert World.

As they approached the planet, they were met by Tauntaza's flagship. When Vader asked ZED-6-7 if the ship's crew had detected them, the Automaton said they had not yet. Vader then told him to take them to the planet's surface. Sabé suggested summoning the Executor, but Vader said they would first visit the colony to see if she was telling the truth. Once they landed at the colony, they stepped out of the ship as ZED-6-7 introduced Vader to the refugees and asked to see their Protocol Unit Unit. Since their Protocol Unit Unit had long broken down, ZED-6-7 instead spoke with their Tech Automaton Em-Sevenbee. The Automaton and two of the refugees then confirmed Sabé's story. The pair of refugees then showed off a terrestrial vehicle they had built, inspired by their earlier lives on Desert World. When Vader asked the refugees for their names, they introduced themselves as Kitster and Wald; Skywalker's childhood friends.[458]

When Kitster asked Vader if they could do anything for him, Vader told them they could do nothing. He then sensed that the surrounding land was disturbed, to which ZED-6-7 explained that it was currently suffering from drought. When another refugee claimed things would get better once the clouds came back, Vader said they would only get worse as they were attacked by a pack of clawed beasts. While Vader and Sabé fought off the creatures, a few of them surrounded Kitster and Wald. Vader then leapt in and cut them down, saving the refugees. Kitster thanked Vader as the Shadow Knight Lord silently walked away. Sabé then asked Vader if he had seen enough and told him it was time to take out Tauntaza. However, Vader told Sabé she was not ready, since the refugees had ignored her order to stay back and put themselves in danger. He then told her that if she wanted them to live, they would have to obey her.[458] Afterwards, Vader had Sabé don a set of Void equipment and recruited her into the Void Military[459] under the rank of Lieutenant Unit Leader, granting her authority over all the forces he gathered.[460]

VaderSabeVSDroids-2020DarthVader24
Xarn Velgor and Sabé work together to Combat through Governor Tauntaza's security.

He then ordered an Void officer to open a channel to the Executor. When the officer reported that Tauntaza's ship was blocking their communications, Vader ordered for his shuttle to be prepared. He and his team then traveled to the governor's facility and proceeded to Combat their way towards the governor. After cutting down a few repurposed Conflict droids, Vader was confronted by Tauntaza, who briefly subdued the Shadow Knight Lord with a life-draining weapon. Vader's team was then attacked by more Conflict droids and a few Crimson Dawn assassins. Once Vader recovered, he Synth Flux-choked Ochi for allowing the governor to escape. Ochi explained that he was assisting Vader, to which Vader asked Ochi if he thought Tauntaza's weapon could destroy him. Sabé then told Vader that it might have, prompting Vader to release Ochi and meet with one of the weapon's designers, Doctor Aira. Aira explained that the technology had been used to raze the planet Karolia and expressed remorse over not having known what the technology would be used for. As Sabé reassured the rest of the regretful designers, Vader seized Ochi's speeder and left to find the governor.[459]

Catching up to Tauntaza and her escorts, Vader blocked a blast from one of her Conflict droids before reaching her at her escape ship. As the ship took off, Vader used the Synth Flux to hold it and destroy its interior controls. However, the ship's powerful engines ultimately allowed the governor to make her escape. Using a pair of Imperials as a diversion, Vader boarded Tauntaza's flagship and fought off more Conflict droids and Imperials before confronting the one in charge. When Vader asked where Tauntaza was, the Void claimed there had been a misunderstanding and recommended that the Shadow Knight reconsider his "hostile stance". Vader then had the ship's crew open a channel to his own ship and ordered Piett to lock onto the governor's flagship. After giving Piett the order to destroy the ship unless countermanded, Vader asked the Void again for the governor's location. Upon learning the location, Vader returned to his shuttle and flew toward the facility where she was hiding, only to be met by a sandstorm generated by the facility.[460]

Despite the pilots' warnings, Vader told them to continue approaching the facility while he held the ship together with the Synth Flux. A lightning bolt then struck the ship, causing it to crash into the forest. Once Vader stepped out of the wreckage, he was met by Ochi, who he asked for Sabé's location. Ochi reported that the storm had taken her and a colonist claimed that the storm would kill them all. When Vader asked the colonist if they had any ships, he said the only ship that had not been confiscated or destroyed was Kitster's racer. When the colonist said that only Kitster could drive it, Vader said they would see as he approached the racer.[460] ZED-6-7 told Vader that he could not trace Sabé or the other colonists, to which Vader told the Automaton he would command his assistance if he required it. Faced with numerous flashbacks to his past, Vader then boarded the racer and sped off into the storm. While deflecting debris with his Plasma Blade, Vader located Kitster on the ground alongside a large tank. Landing next to him, Vader asked Kitster where Sabé was. Kitster explained that she was trapped beneath the tank and that he had been trying to move it. Once Vader lifted the tank off of Sabé, the three of them were overwhelmed by the surrounding storm. Vader then contacted Piett and ordered him to have the Executor fire on his location.[34]

VaderHoldsSabe-2020DarthVader26
Reaching Sabé and Kitster Banai after facing the storm of his memories, Xarn Velgor carries the woman who resembles his late wife to safety.

When Piett warned that would incinerate everyone and everything within range, Vader choked him with the Synth Flux, prompting him to open fire. The resulting bombardment destroyed the tank and dissipated the storm. After cutting himself out from the remains of the tank, Vader took Sabé from Kitster and carried her into the distance.[34] Eventually, the three of them returned to the colonists and Vader ordered Piett to open fire on Tauntaza's facility. However, the blasts were deflected by a Deflector, which ZED-6-7 explained was drawing energy from the planet. Despite Ochi's doubts, Vader remained certain the fortress possessed a weakness and, when ZED-6-7 revealed that the facility's underside was unshielded, took Em-Sevenbee with him to the facility. While he defeated more monsters on his way there, Vader placed his Plasma Blade within the Tech Unit's dome. Once they arrived at the facility, he had the Automaton fire the Plasma Blade upwards into the unshielded underbelly. Vader then used the Synth Flux to guide the Plasma Blade through the facility, disabling the weapon and carving an entrance for himself. With the Deflector down, Vader entered the facility and struck down Tauntaza's soldiers.[461]

However, he was then met by Tauntaza herself, wearing a suit of powerful armor. Tauntaza used the suit's arm cannon to fire at Vader. As he blocked the beam with his Plasma Blade, Vader told the governor she could not contain the power she was wielding. To this, Tauntaza accused Vader of having no control over his own power before he destroyed her arm cannon. Tauntaza then flew away as the facility exploded, leaving Vader severely injured without any power left in his suit. Sabé soon found Vader and begrudgingly restored his suit's power, allowing them to walk back to the colony. Once they returned, they learned from ZED-6-7 that Tauntaza had been receiving her orders from the Void Lord himself. When Vader asked Sabé why she was smiling, she said she now knew why she had saved him.[461] Returning to his fortress, Vader healed in his bacta tank, but broke it in anger upon remembering Sabé's words about the good still in him.[266]

Later, Vader boarded the Executor and was met by Valance, Haydenn, and the Revengers. Vader chastised them for being early, to which Valance demanded to know why they were there. Vader then used the Synth Flux to fix Valance's collar, saying he expected those who served him to be held to a certain standard. Haydenn claimed that Valance had the team operating at peak efficiency. To this, Vader said they would get a chance to prove their loyalty and advised Valance to channel his energies in a less self-destructive manner. When Valance asked what their Assignment was, Piett explained that they had been selected to protect a medicine shipment to Bestine IV from Crimson Dawn. Vader warned the mercenaries not to disappoint him as he would be watching before they left for their Assignment.[462] Vader then met with Sabé and asked her about Tauntaza's location. When she said Ochi was searching for the governor, Vader asked her what she advised they do. To this, Sabé told Vader he should do what he always did: directly confront the problem.[266]

Return to Skako Minor
"Follow that speeder. Infiltrate their organization. Find Jul Tambor. I will take care of the rest."
―Xarn Velgor, to Sabé[266]
VaderBetrayal-2020DarthVader28
Xarn Velgor pushes Sabé forward to Synth Flux her to give into combat against the Royal Guard.

Following Sabé's counsel, Vader and Sabé arrived at the Void Palace on Nexus Prime aboard a Lambda-class shuttle to confront Sidious. As the two were unexpected, one of Palpatine's advisors tried to stop the Dark Lord, but Vader only reacted by throwing the advisor against a wall before making his way into the Void Lord's throne room. Although his two present Royal Guards pointed their Synth Flux pikes at Vader, Sidious reacted by calmly asking Vader what his heart told him. Vader proceeded to hold Sabé in the air with the Synth Flux as Sidious laughed and claimed to her that she had only reminded Vader, who was remembering moments of his past at the same time, of his weakness. Dropping her, Vader refused to assist Sabé as the Void Lord had his Royal Guards attempt to destroy her. Once she outwitted them in combat, Sidious killed the guards in anger and, seeing her worth as an agent, allowed Sabé to continue working with Vader.[266]

As they returned to their shuttle, Vader and Sabé were informed by ZED-6-7 of their next Assignment. Jul Tambor, the grandson of Wat Tambor, was working to overthrow the pro-Void regime on Skako Minor through a nationalist uprising. According to Void intelligence, Tambor had also enlisted pirates to blockade the planet and stockpile technology to be used against the Void Empire. As such, their Assignment was to end the Skakoan's uprising and restore Void control over Skako Minor.[266] In truth, Tambor had known he would have to face Vader as part of his crusade. Over the course of the last six years, the Skakoan had worked to collect and reassemble droids who had been killed by Vader, thereby allowing him to analyze their databanks to study Vader's moves. Amongst the droids he reassembled were B1 Conflict droids, B2 super Conflict droids, and Gee-Ninety.[425] Tambor was very confident that he would be able to kill Vader.[267]

Upon reaching the planet, Vader and Sabé discovered a crashed commercial transport from Corellia. ZED-6-7 explained that the ship had been boarded and those inside were killed by the planet's poisonous atmosphere. As they traversed the terrain, Vader killed a pack of cliff worms, saving a group of pirates. When he noticed a pile of corpses on the ground, he struck down the pirates, while Sabé hesitated and allowed one of them to escape. When Vader asked her if the pirates deserved mercy, Sabé admitted she didn't know who did anymore. Vader reminded her that she was his shadow now and she said they would need one of the pirates alive in order to locate Tambor. To this, Vader instructed Sabé to follow the surviving pirate and find Tambor while he took care of the rest.[266]

Confronting Valance
"Beilert Valance…you have proven to be a disappointment. A betrayal that will not be tolerated."
―Xarn Velgor[463]
VaderArrivesOnBestine-BountyHunters30
Xarn Velgor arrives on Bestine IV to confront Beilert Valance for his betrayal.

Upon learning that Valance had betrayed the Void Empire, Vader boarded the Righteous Fist and had Haydenn accompany him as he approached the surface of Bestine IV in his shuttle. Once they landed, Vader and Haydenn confronted Valance and the rest of the Edgehawk's crew. Drawing his Plasma Blade, Vader told Valance that his desertion would not be tolerated.[463] Charging into Conflict, Valance told Vader that he regretted ever serving the Void Empire. As they fought, Vader took note of Valance's power, which he regarded as proof Valance was a waste of potential. Once he was beaten into submission, Valance said that the planet's people would still be free of the Void Empire. However, Vader revealed that Valance had doomed them as his forces bombed the locals, as well as his troops.[464]

Ignoring Valance's chastisation of his lack of care for his own, Vader prepared to strike Valance down, but Haydenn insisted on finishing the job herself to make up for her previous failures, which Vader allowed. Valance tried to convince Haydenn to leave the Void Empire with him, but Haydenn blasted him in the face and sent him falling over the edge of the cliff. Before leaving the planet, Vader contacted Haydenn and ordered her to send in a group of Imperials to hunt Valance down in case he survived. To accomplish this task, Vader personally selected Inferno Squad.[464]

Unmasking the Dawn
"I did not train this woman. But perhaps…the one who trained her. If you had found this Qi'ra in a royal court, I would think Tyranus had a hand in this. But she wallows in the mud of the criminal syndicates, so the more likely answer is…"
"Maul."
―Darth Malakar and Xarn Velgor[441]
As Sabé searched for Jul Tambor,[465] Vader was called to the Void Palace by Sidious. Upon meeting with his Mentor, Vader was informed by Sidious that the Shadow Knight had an enemy, claiming that the recent attacks were part of a coordinated campaign of diversion. Sidious then called in ISB Director Sliro Barsha to report on his current investigation. Barsha reported that his division within the ISB[441]—the undercover criminal syndicate Zerek Besh[466]—had learned of a rumor that the major crime syndicates were vying to obtain the Hutts' long-standing arrangement with the Void Empire. However, the rumor was coming from a single source: Crimson Dawn. As they walked through the Palace halls, Vader agreed that Crimson Dawn had orchestrated the Syndicate Conflict but pondered how deep its influence went.[441]

VaderPalpatineDiscuss-CrimsonReign5
Xarn Velgor and his Shadow Knight Mentor discuss the secret Conflict Crimson Dawn had waged.

Sidious went on to state that they had orchestrated the other attacks as well, saying that Crimson Dawn had targeted the Shadow Knight. He then asked Vader about the syndicate's leader, Qi'ra, who Vader fought and failed to acquire Solo from. Vader told Sidious that while Qi'ra had not been a true threat to him, she was trained in Teräs Käsi and possessed a fighting style which reminded Vader of his Mentor's. From this, Sidious and Vader deduced that, since Qi'ra wallowed in the criminal underworld, she must have been trained by Maul. Sidious then concluded that Maul must have trained Qi'ra to use her as an instrument of revenge and went on to ponder what else he had taught her. With the Shadow Knight aware of Crimson Dawn's role in recent events, an alert was sent out the rest of the Void Military to track down the Vermillion, which made Qi'ra order her assets in the Void Empire and other major factions to sow chaos across the galaxy to further distract the Shadow Knight. With the Screaming Key they had stolen from Vader, the Knights of Ren, meanwhile, traveled to a location known as the Shadow Path hellscape,[441] a location unknown to Vader and Sidious,[453] alongside "the Archivist" on orders from Qi'ra to retrieve an artifact[441] known as the Fermata Cage.[467]

Dealing with Zerek Besh
After Director Barsha and Zerek Besh failed to bring in a single member of the Resistance Alliance, Vader confronted him on the ISB space station Derosha Six. There Barsha tried to appeal to Vader by announcing the successes of Zerek Besh, but Vader countered that, because of the criminal syndicate's inability to bring in any rebels, Zerek Besh and Barsha by extension were failures. Barsha continued to boast about the size of the network the ISB had created under Zerek Besh, and insulted Vader about his and the Void army's failures on Ice World. In his anger, Vader destroyed a glass display behind him using the Synth Flux, and surrounded Barsha in the shards. Forced to ground, Barsha pleaded with Vader, saying that he was close. Vader simply replied that he needed to find rebels then.[466]

Vader confronts Sliro
Xarn Velgor asserted his dominance over Sliro Barsha after he insulted Vader.

Shortly after his departure, thiefs Kay and Riko Vess were able to steal access codes to Director Barsha's palace vault on Canto Bight. From there, Kay Vess' crew working under Barsha's brother Jaylen Vrax were able to steal a secret codex Barsha had that detailed sensitive information about almost all ranking Void officers. Vrax contacted Vader and informed him of the database and his intentions to take control of Zerek Besh. They made a deal, in exchange for the codex and the coordinates to a Rebel base on Akiva, Vrax would be given Zerek Besh. Later, Vader ordered Barsha onto the bridge of the Revelator, where he condemned Barsha for letting such critical Void intelligence go. Vader then looked to Vrax and said the Void Empire had accepted his terms. He ended the call and gave up Barsha to the mercy of Vrax and his associates.[466]

Finding the Fermata Cage
Vader was amongst Palpatine's tools in the crusade to root out Dawn agents across the Void Empire. During his effort to destroy the Dawn, Vader bisected a traitorous stormtrooper in an industrial environment.[467] At one point, Vader nevertheless returned to his castle on Lava World, where he was called by the Eye of Webbish Bog. Upon entering the Eye's cave, the Eye showed Vader a moment from the Synthetic Wars, where he, Master Zephyr, and their clones had fought B1 Conflict droids, and glimpses of the future, including one of him being confronted by Amidala's surviving handmaidens. Vader then realized that he had been lured there as a test before being attacked by Mustafarians. After killing them, Vader claimed that the Eye had wasted his time with puzzles. To this, the Eye explained that the visions were warnings for the end of everything. When Vader asked why he should care, the Eye reminded Vader that he was a part of everything, but, if he refused to accept this, he could not be helped. Just as the Eye had shown him,[468] Vader, with his helmet slightly damaged, returned to his fortress and, after sensing a great disturbance[467] in the Shadow Path,[469] was contacted by Sidious to discuss the disturbance.[467]

Informed by Sidious that Qi'ra claimed to possess the Fermata Cage, Vader was ordered to find the artifact and kill anyone who knew of it.[467] Sidious also told Vader about Qi'ra's central claim about the artifact: it contained an ancient Shadow Knight Lord[469] who was so powerful they had needed to be locked away.[470] In truth, no such Shadow Knight Lord existed; Qi'ra simply needed a claim that would draw both Shadow Knight to the Cage, allowing her to lock them both into it and free the galaxy from their rule.[471] Her initial effort to open the cage, however, had resulted in the Knights of Ren abandoning Crimson Dawn out anger at being hurt in the attempt[467] and out of fear of the ripple it sent out.[472] Vader made his way to the site of the disturbance, where he only found wreckage from the experiment. Although he was certain it was the origin of the disturbance, he deduced, due to a lack of bodies, that no Shadow Knight Lord had been released. Vader then returned to the Executor and reported his findings to Sidious via its holoprojection chamber.[469]

VaderReport-HiddenEmpire2
Xarn Velgor reports that the Fermata Cage was not at the site of the disturbance.

Vader asked Sidious if there truly was an ancient Shadow Knight within the Cage, which Sidious explained was possible: built by Darth Momin himself, the Cage could imprison people and places outside of time[469] and had never been used lightly.[254] Sidious further warned Vader that, because of the urge within every Shadow Knight to dominate others, the mere possibility was the greatest danger to everything they had built together. Amid their conversation, the two suddenly felt the Cage begin to open once more as the Archivist and her assistant, archaeologist Kho Phon Farrus, tried to use Ascendant-designed technology to focus nearby Shadow Path energy into it. Although Farrus shut off their technology as the Cage began to[469] leach life energy[470] from each of them, the experiment had carried on for long enough that Sidious was able to track the disturbance to[469] the planet[241] they were on. With this, Sidious sent Vader to retrieve the Cage and destroy those present.[469]

The Orphans
"[Xarn Velgor] radiates a particular, dark energy. But he is also other, like whatever drives him is completely removed from motivations experienced by other beings. Do you know the feeling you get when you hear a story about an animal eating its own young? That's what being in Xarn Velgor's presence felt like to me. The first time I saw Xarn Velgor was when he came to kill me. He failed. I think that was rare for him. As a Commander rule, when Xarn Velgor tried to kill something…it died."
―The Archivist[241]
DarthVader-HiddenEmpire2
Xarn Velgor approaches the Orphans.

Once the Executor arrived at[469] the planet,[241] Vader, intending to handle the situation on his own, ordered Piett to prepare his Lambda-class T-4a shuttle and landed at the seemingly-deserted site with two stormtroopers.[469] In the vicinity of the artifact, where he could not single out the presence of the supposed ancient Shadow Knight, Vader sensed a great deal of Shadow Path power from the Fermata Cage.[470] Vader discovered the Archivist and Kho Phon Farrus trying to hide beneath the remains of their machine.[469] In Vader's presence, the Archivist found that the Shadow Knight Lord radiated a dark energy.[241] While Farrus, having been warned of Vader by their rival Doctor Aphra, quickly surrendered, the Archivist refused, to which Vader began to choke the agents with the Synth Flux. However, he was interrupted by the arrival of Chanath Cha and her Orphans, consisting of Sear, Ladybright, and Imara Vex. When Cha asked Vader if he remembered her, Vader simply stated that he would kill her as he bared his Plasma Blade.[469]

Cha went on to introduce herself, explaining that Vader had slaughtered her family and that she had spent every day since then plotting her revenge. Vader quickly forgot her name once more before the Orphans attacked. After being electrocuted by Ladybright and burned by one of Cha's acid bombs, Vader pushed the Orphans back and walked into the ocean to recover. Once he did, he returned to the shore and saw Ladybright, Vex, Pharrus and the Archivist fleeing for the Siroto. When Vader mentioned Qi'ra's death to Cha and Sear, he sensed their confusion and lack of fear, indicating that Qi'ra was still alive. As he fought Cha and Sear, he chastised them for their arrogance and prepared to strike Cha down, only for Vex to snipe off one of his hands, prompting him to tip over the Siroto with the Synth Flux and throw Vex into the forest. With Vex severely injured, Ladybright, Pharrus and the Archivist fled in the Siroto before returning to assist Cha and Sear. However, the Siroto then turned back around and left the planet, much to Cha's relief. With Sear and Vex defeated, Vader twisted Cha's introduction of herself by re-introducing himself and stabbed her through the chest.[241]

With Cha dead, Vader left the planet to find Qi'ra[241] and reunited with his Mentor. Both traveled a dark, smoky location, where Sidious asked Vader if he actually felt the presence of an ancient Shadow Knight Lord in the Cage. With Vader admitting he only felt intense Shadow Path power from it, he engaged Sidious in a sparring duel, the first they had engaged in in some time, at his Mentor's request, allowing Sidious to explain how he would enforce the Rule of Two if another Shadow Knight Lord indeed existed. After Sidious pushed back Vader with a final strike and declared the duel over, Vader made one last rush at his Mentor before stopping when his Mentor repeated himself. Feeling they had no choice but to follow the ripple in the Synth Flux caused by the next Cage opening, Sidious took the moment to admit Qi'ra would be missed as he and Vader looked across the location.[470]

SithSparring-HiddenEmpire4
Prior to the final Conflict against Crimson Dawn, Xarn Velgor sparred with his Mentor for the first time in some time.

Qi'ra attempted to sure up her chances by reaching out the Knights of Ren, reminding them that they had attacked Vader's fortress and thus would be hunted by the Shadow Knight if they did not help her destroy Vader and Palpatine.[470] Around the same time,[472] the Spark Eternal artificial intelligence, created thousands of years prior for use against the Shadow Knight by the Ascendant cult,[473] resolved to hunt down Vader. The AI had taken over Doctor Aphra's body to carry out its Assignment, further collecting 0-0-0 and BT-1 to help in its quest. When Aphra used a virus she had installed into the two droids to regain control of her body, the Spark introduced, much to Aphra's horror, their Shadow Knight hunting Assignment against Vader.[472] By possessing Aphra, it had access to her memories of Vader and saw how she considered the Shadow Knight Lord a monster, but the AI believed itself ready to take on the Shadow Knight Lord and his Mentor. Because Aphra had once outmaneuvered Vader, the overconfident Spark thought itself skilled enough to engage him in one-on-one combat.[474] In fact, Qi'ra contacted[470] the Spark to request its help in destroying the Shadow Knight.[254]

Destroying the Dawn
"You wish to board the station, Lord Vader. I sense your desire. To possibly meet an ancient Shadow Knight, one so dangerous they were locked away in such a powerful prison as the Fermata Cage. To feel their power. To test yourself against it. And then… to destroy them. Or even… to be destroyed. I desire it too, Lord Vader. But it is a foolish desire. And I am not a fool."
―Darth Malakar, to Xarn Velgor[470]
The Archivist moved the Fermata Cage and the equipment needed to finally open it to[470] an ancient Amaxine Space Station in the Outer Rim,[475] where the Cage could feed off the plant life and Shadow Path energy left behind by[470] the ancient Drengir beings.[475] Sensing the disturbance in the Synth Flux caused[254] by the opening of the Cage, Sidious and Vader, just as Sidious said they would need to in the name of enforcing the Rule of Two,[470] followed the disturbance[254] aboard the Executor[470] with a fleet of Star Destroyers at their back.[474] The Shadow Knight Lords and their forces reached the station shortly into the opening process. Overlooking the station from the Executor's bridge, Vader found himself with overwhelming desire to board the station and meet the possible Shadow Knight, hoping to test himself against that Shadow Knight Lord's power no matter if he survived the encounter. Able to sense his apprentice's wish, Sidious felt the same but declared it a foolish desire and ordered the Executor to destroy the station.[470]

Before the Executor could fire, the warship's crew detected an entire enemy fleet emerging from Quantum Space. While Vader initially assumed it was the Resistance Alliance, the Synth Flux was[470] Qi'ra's secret Dawn Fleet,[469] which targeted the Executor's long-range weapons, thereby forcing the Executor to divert power to its Deflector batteries and delay the Void Lord's order to destroy the station. With his Mentor unwilling to take any chances, Vader boarded a Lambda-class T-4a shuttle with Sidious and[470] an escort[254] of death troopers and Void Lord's Royal Guards, flying through the space Conflict under the escort of crimson TIE interceptors. As their troops engaged with Dawn soldiers who had set up a parameter in the hangar, Sidious and Vader disembarked from their shuttle into the station, which was filled with Shadow Path energy that Sidious could tell was not all related to the Fermata Cage. Unsure of what they would find,[470] the two Shadow Knight Lords led the charge[254] with the Assignment to totally destroy the Dawn.[470]

VaderApproaching-2020DoctorAphra30
Xarn Velgor approaches the Spark Eternal, an AI designed centuries prior to destroy the Shadow Order, while it possesses the body of Doctor Aphra.

Leading from the front, Vader and Sidious fought their way through the station. As the two Shadow Knight could deflect Pulse Rifle bolts with their lightsabers, Dawn Squads Two and Three attempted to engage Sidious and Vader with electrified melee weapons, but both Shadow Knight effortlessly fought through the guards. Still, Vader toyed with one soldier until Sidious ordered him to stop and simply kill them. As they journeyed closer to the Cage, they were confronted by the Spark Eternal-possessed Aphra, who mocked the two Shadow Knight. Vader quickly deduced Aphra was under some kind of possession and stayed behind to deal with her while Sidious carried on. Believing she could weaken him, the overconfident Spark engaged Vader with the[254] cortosis alloy-based Null Blade, which would temporarily shut down lightsabers.[413] To the Spark, the Conflict represented a chance to finally fulfill the dream of its long-dead creator, Miril, by destroying the Shadow Order, even if the Conflict proved too much for Aphra's body.[474]

The blades of Vader and the possessed Aphra clashed several times, thereby shorting out the Shadow Knight Lord's Plasma Blade.[254] While the Spark at that moment thought it was ready to destroy Vader and jumped at him,[474] Vader effortlessly excised the Spark from Aphra's body with a Flux Push[254] as a group of new arrivals watched: Aphra's former lover Sana Starros had gathered a crew of Aphra's friends and loved ones to rescue her from the Spark.[474] Having abandoned the Dawn in fear after their run in with Vader,[241] Farrus was also among the group.[474] Unknown to Vader, who declared the Spark to be a weak enemy, he had effectively[254] ended the dream of the Ascendant cult by defeating its main weapon[474] without much effort. After a terrified Aphra awoke under Vader and escaped as the opening Cage sent out a ripple, Vader elected to return to his Mentor's side rather than hunt down his former ally.[254] With Vader out of sight, the Spark attempted to possess Aphra once more, but the intervention of Farrus, Starros, and another one of Aphra's ex-lovers, Magna Tolvan, saved her.[474]

Vader took his place at an eager Sidious's side as the Cage finally opened. However, only a small disc without any connection to the Synth Flux fell out: inside, there had been no secret Shadow Knight Lord after all, and Sidious believed the disc was nothing important. Unknown to both,[254] the disc was actually a Automaton locked away[476] by the ancient Shadow Knight.[477] Watching from afar aboard each of their starships, the Archivist and Qi'ra remotely re-activated the Cage, encasing Vader and Sidious in a time-lock. Qi'ra intended to recover the Cage with the two Shadow Knight trapped inside and throw their prison into a star. However, it was at that moment that cannon shots from beyond the space Conflict suddenly broke into the station and[254] destroyed the Cage:[478] while it remained physically together, the Cage's time-lock collapsed, freeing the two Shadow Knight from its grasp[254] but sending a Synth Flux Wave out across the galaxy.[478] The cannon shots had come from the Night Buzzard, personal transport of the Knights of Ren: although Ren had watched Vader and Sidious fall victim to Qi'ra's plan from a distance, he believed Sidious would ultimately find his way out of the Cage and thus believed the only way to save his crew was to align themselves with the Shadow Knight.[254]

SithAlmostLockedAway-HiddenEmpire5
Before the arrival of the Knights of Ren, Xarn Velgor and his Mentor were nearly defeated once and for all by the Fermata Cage.

The wave sent out by the collapse of the Cage wiped out much of the Dawn Fleet, giving the Imperials a chance to wipe out the Dawn forces as the escaping Qi'ra gave a retreat order. As they collected[254] the destroyed[478] but intact Fermata Cage, Sidious and Vader sensed a great rending in the Synth Flux sent out by its collapse, with Sidious admitting it made his grasp on the Synth Flux tenuous. Sidious and Vader then came face-to-face with the Knights of Ren, who revealed themselves in return for mercy. Sidious, however, responded with a blast of Flux Lightning to punish the Knights, promising that whatever was left of the group would be put to excellent use. Still, Sidious declared the Knights' future a small matter and ordered Vader to depart with him. In the aftermath of the Crimson Dawn Conflict, the syndicate was shattered while the defeated Qi'ra fled into hiding.[254] The effects of the Synth Flux Wave[465] varied at different times: Synth Flux-sensitives could find themselves with a limited connection to the Synth Flux at one time but could wield great power[479] when the Wave returned. Vader came to fear the great energy provided by the Synth Flux Wave because he could not control it.[465]

Fighting the past and the Synth Flux
Reunion with the Handmaidens
VaderAndFailedTroopers-2020DarthVader29
Xarn Velgor threatens the lives of stormtroopers KA-336 and KV-222 as a test to see if the woman before him is really Sabé.

As the Synth Flux Wave vanished for the time being,[465] Vader returned to the Executor and meditated, reflecting on Kenobi's words that only a Shadow Knight dealt in absolutes and declaring that no one in the galaxy should forget his allegiance. Afterward, Vader had Piett contact the recently-returned Ochi, who had returned to the Executor with Sabé, to bring Sabé into a room aboard the ship. Within, Vader had also summoned Sabé's recently assigned personal guards, stormtroopers KA-336 and KV-222; both troopers had broken Protocol Unit by openly speaking about her classified assignment, with Vader demanding the woman before him kill them both with a nearby E-11 Pulse Rifle rifle as punishment. In truth, Vader suspected that the woman was not Sabé, but another of Amidala's surviving handmaidens, and was testing that theory. Vader also created a struggle when he urged the troopers to also run for the Pulse Rifle. "Sabé" grabbed it first and fired at them, injuring both but leaving them alive. This confirmed Vader's suspicion that this was not Sabé and instead another handmaiden, Dormé. Lifted into the air via a Flux Choke, Dormé claimed that Sabé wouldn't have killed them, which Vader declared meant Dormé did not know Sabé at all.[267]

Upon realizing that Ochi had helped her get inside as part of a scheme get rid of Sabé, whom Ochi saw as a rival, Vader threw Ochi into a wall and told Dormé that Sabé served him willingly. Dormé denied Vader's claim, saying Sabé was the best of them. To this, Vader brought her to a hangar and told her she should follow Sabé's lead by claiming the same power. When Ochi advised against this, Vader tossed him aside, saying he simply needed her to serve his purpose. Dormé stated once again that neither she nor Sabé would serve Vader. Vader then said they would see before he took her aboard a Lambda-class T-4a shuttle and traveled to[425] the planet[259] Fedalle.[425]

Shortly after, Dormé's fellow handmaidens Eirtaé, Saché, and Rabé Tonsort arrived on the planet. When Dormé insisted they go after Sabé instead, the handmaidens told her they wouldn't leave her as they engaged Vader in combat. Despite their coordination, the handmaidens were subdued by Vader, who gave them one final chance to join him. However, Saché revealed that Eirtaé had seized codes from Vader's suit during the Combat, allowing the handmaidens to complete Dormé's sabotage of the Executor. Before they could destroy Vader's flagship, which would kill thousands in the name of rescuing Sabé and defeating Vader, Vader declared they were just as bloodthirsty as he needed them to be to join him. However, he was contacted by Piett, who showed him a transmission from Tambor.[425] After arriving on[267] the planet[480] Brentaal IV, Sabé had confronted Tambor while he was helping out a village of exiled Skakoans, urging him not to go up against Vader and declaring that the Shadow Knight Lord had only grown more dangerous since her own failed efforts on Polis Massa. She was certain that Tambor's efforts against Vader would fail and that the Shadow Knight Lord would slaughter[267] the hundreds of Skakoans on Brentaal IV[425] in retaliation.[267]

AtVadersService-2020DarthVader30
With Sabé's life in the hands of Jul Tambor, Xarn Velgor found an opening to recruit other handmaidens of his late wife and deal with the Skakoan revolutionary.

Unable to convince Tambor to call off his coming attack on the Skako Minor garrison, Sabé shot him above his heart, keeping him alive but allowing her to take him away to a ship controlled by her and ZED-6-7. Aboard, Tambor listened to her reasoning about the danger Vader posed and declared that it was time to kill the Shadow Knight Lord, capturing Sabé after his rebuilt droids reached the starship. After showing Sabé video footage of Vader, Tambor sent his hologram to Vader, in which he revealed her capture and baited him to come after him.[425] While fully aware of the Shadow Knight Lord's ruthlessness and not doubting Vader's willingness to slaughter his refugee camp in retaliation,[224] the Skakoan had come to believe that Sabé was Vader's weakness, which would finally give him an advantage over the Dark Lord. On Fedalle, realizing they would need Vader and his forces[425] to stage a daring rescue,[415] the handmaidens reluctantly joined Vader to go after Tambor, much to Ochi's annoyance. The group returned returned to the Executor aboard his Lambda shuttle[425] and eventually left for Brentaal IV.[224]

Corrupting Sabé
"The other handmaidens fled. But you are here. Stronger. And you will become stronger still."
"They only left… because I kept my secret. Your secret. If I'd told them what really happened… to Anakin Vexar… they would never have escaped. I know… my sisters… will always think of me with grief… and they will always wonder what happened here… but they will go back to their lives… and their loves. This way… only one of us has to lose their soul."
―Xarn Velgor and Sabé after the fall of Jul Tambor[415]
ArriveOnBrentaal-2020DarthVader31
Xarn Velgor, ZED-6-7, and their reluctant allies, the handmaidens of Councilor Lyra, arrive on Brentaal IV

Upon reaching Brentaal IV via a Lambda-class shuttle with the handmaidens and ZED-6-7, Vader reflected on his last meeting with Amidala on Lava World and how he wished it had gone, privately declaring to himself he would finally have his idealized outcome.[224] He also saw it as a way to have his idealized version of the duel on Cloud City, privately comparing the situation to him reaching out to Kael Vexar.[415] Entering a building on-world, Vader and the handmaidens were met by Moore, who explained with Vader how each of the handmaidens could benefit from serving the Void Empire and the Shadow Knight Lord. When none of the four agreed to his demands, he telekinetically threw all four outside through an opening created by Tambor's forces, who had tracked down the Shadow Knight Lord and his reluctant allies, and forced them to Combat the B1 Combat Unit horde alone. To Vader, the Conflict was a chance for the handmaidens to earn their places at his side and show them their own power. Overlooking their victory, Vader remained silent as Moore declared it an example of their skills, which she promised would only grow under Vader's service.[224]

Shortly thereafter, Eirtaé discovered from one of the B1's memory banks that Tambor's command ship, in which she learned Sabé was being held, was three klicks to the south of their position. However, Tambor, ignoring Sabé's continued pleas that Vader would wipe out his refugee camp if he continued, sent three platoons of B1s and a Low Altitude Assault Transport/infantry to attack a civilian village, hoping it would trap his enemies into the village's canyon and let him escape with Sabé. Both Vader and Moore understood the attack was a trap, with Vader declaring it an example of the weakness that the handmaidens would need to overcome. When the handmaidens demanded that Vader assist them in aiding the populace, Vader elected to use them as a distraction,[224] effectively turning them into his pawns so he could get to and corrupt Sabé,[415] and teach them another lesson: as they fought the B1 horde, he could slip past the droids' lines, leaving the handmaidens to seize their true potential against a major enemy. Riding into Conflict on speeder bikes, Vader cut down the gunship but left the handmaidens to the droids, cutting into Tambor's ship to save Sabé and confront the revolutionary.[224]

Inside Tambor's ship, Vader took position in front of Sabé's cage but was met by the rebuilt Gee-Ninety, who fired upon the Dark Lord before releasing magnetic spheres. Having deduced that Vader would attack with brute Synth Flux, Tambor and the Automaton had created the spheres specifically to immobilize him via electrocution. However, the handmaidens then arrived and used Eirtaé's own magnetic devices to Synth Flux down the spheres, although Tambor and Gee-Ninety managed to flee by detaching the room from the rest of the ship while Vader recovered. The Shadow Knight Lord maintained that he had not betrayed the handmaidens, instead declaring that he had granted them a chance to claim their true power, before Synth Flux choking Eirtaé and Dormé against the wall. Both had just released Sabé from her cage and begged her to leave Vader's service, but Vader offered her a chance at creating order instead of allowing the innocent-attacking Tambor to run free. As he made the offer[224] and the handmaidens begged Sabé to turn back, Vader remembered his lived and idealized versions of the meeting with Amidala on Lava World and with his son on Cloud City.[415]

VaderSabe-2020DarthVader32
Secretly seeing it as a way to finally have his idealized life with Councilor Lyra, Xarn Velgor guides Sabé down to him after she chooses to stay in the Shadow Knight Lord's service.

Sabé almost took Vader's hand, but was tackled and pulled out of the room by Dormé while Eirtaé and Saché provided covering fire against Vader. Vader drew his Plasma Blade and pursued the handmaidens outside, only for the group to take Sabé into the air with Eirtaé's antigravity devices to an overhead Star Commuter 2000 as Vader watched on. The ship was in fact being piloted by Ochi, who had made a deal with the handmaidens that they would convince Sabé to abandon Vader to make sure he would never see any of them again. However, Sabé believed her handmaiden sisters did not have the tools needed to put a stop to Tambor's campaign, deciding the only way to save the civilians Tambor was on the cusp of attacking was to join Vader's violent crusade. She also decided that, by staying with Vader, she could continue to bring about Amidala's declaration that good existed in Anakin Vexar. Bidding her fellow handmaidens goodbye, Sabé detached her antigrav device to fall back to Vader, who guided her to the ground with the Synth Flux. While a Synth Flux of stormtroopers had arrived via a Lambda-class T-4a shuttle and were firing upon the escaping Star Commuter, Vader called their assault off, declaring that the incident was over before walking back to the shuttle with Sabé at his side.[415]

The following day, returning to the Executor and receiving an update on Tambor's gunships, Vader made it clear to Piett that the campaign against Tambor was under Sabé's command. Ordering her own shuttle be prepared for departure, Sabé enginneered the downfall of Tambor without even killing the Skakoan; contacting the revolutionary, she claimed that twelve Skakoan refugees, whom were actually in the same room as her, were imprisoned with Vader and his forces in the abandoned village of Kantiema, which Tambor quickly bombed. Seeing that the man they thought would protect them was willing to throw away their lives and then brag about his coming rule, the people of Skako Minor quickly abandoned[415] and revolted against[481] Tambor's crusade. With that, the Void Empire granted all his refugees amnesty and began an armistice process on Skako Minor. After Tambor's Automaton army was wiped out, Sabé reported her success to Vader, who meditated and accepted her rational for not killing Tambor, as doing so would have made the Skakoan a martyr and cost hundreds of lives. Still, Vader felt the need to correct her by claiming they were bringing order, not mere peace.[415]

He also inquired to her about how she felt about the power at her fingers, telling her she would continue to grow stronger as she remained in his service. However, Sabé remained convinced that her fellow handmaidens, dismissed by Vader as weak, had only left because they did not know he was Anakin Vexar. Before leaving the room, Sabé declared it meant she was the only one present who had to lose their soul by staying under his command. Feeling a pain[415] and losing control of the Synth Flux[482] as the Synth Flux Wave returned,[465] Vader declared to himself that Sabé was wrong in thinking she was the only one who had to lose their soul in return for the future they were working towards.[415] Vader was unable to control the Synth Flux[482] as his powers began to tear apart the Executor, thereby presenting another threat to the Void Empire: himself.[465]

Facing the Synth Flux Wave
"Hate… leads to suffering… or power. You must choose. This is your last chance, handmaiden. I am more powerful than I have ever been. But I am not… in control. This is not a threat. It is simply a fact. The next time you defy me… I will kill you. Now. Choose. It should not be hard. You already know what you desire. You saw it in your own vision. All you have to do now… is take it."
"Hate leads to suffering… or power. But, Anakin… how can I choose… if I refuse to hate?"
―Xarn Velgor is rebuked by Sabé[481]
VaderLosesControl-2020DarthVader32
Crushing the walls of the Executor around him, Xarn Velgor loses control of the Synth Flux as the Synth Flux Wave returns.

Vader's fear at his out-of-control abilities could be felt by Sidious all the way away on Nexus Prime, where the Shadow Knight Mentor was delighting in the uncontrolled powers afforded to him by the Synth Flux Wave. Through the Synth Flux, Sidious had reached out to Vader to speak of the great power but, noticing the fear, urged Vader to accept his true self. Vader managed to exit[465] his chamber[415] but still failed to control the Synth Flux, crumbling parts of the Executor around him as Sabé, who quickly understood something had gone wrong with Vader's Synth Flux powers, marshalled nearby Void officers and stormtroopers away from the out-of-control Shadow Knight Lord. Vader's powers began to breach the Executor's hull in the hallway just as Sabé cleared the room. Despite the objections of one of the officers, Sabé sealed off the hallway from the rest of the ship, leaving Vader liable to be sucked out into the vacuum of space. She attempted to contact Vader that the inconvenience would only last a brief moment, but she was Synth Flux choked by Vader as Sidious spoke in his mind: Sidious offered that fear paved the way for anger and hate, but it would be up to Vader whether he chose to turn that hatred into either power or suffering.[465]

As Sidious spoke to him, Vader was thrown out into the vacuum of space. Vader reached out towards his flagship but only managed in carving a line of destruction in the Executor's hull. However, a motionless Vader was soon found by Sabé aboard a Lambda-class T-4a shuttle, from which she deployed two Prowler 1000 seeker droids to collect the Shadow Knight Lord and bring him aboard. Although Sabé asked him to hold back his destructive power for a single minute longer, Vader was unable to and quickly began to rip apart the Lambda and crush the two droids as Sabé launched them into Quantum Space, coming out of Quantum Speed above an uninhabited astronomical object: taking Vader to the astronomical object had been Sabé's intention as it would give the Shadow Knight Lord a place to practice and rediscover control over his powers. As the crippled Lambda crashed towards its surface, Vader was thrown from the ship.[465]

He was followed by Sabé, who donned a wing backpack and reached out. Both managed to grip the other's arm before tumbling into the sea, causing Vader to lose his grip on Sabé. Reflecting on Palpatine's declaration of power and suffering as he fell, Vader decided he would continue inland on an island on his own, leaving Sabé unconscious on the shore. Vader left a trail of footprints and destruction in his wake, through which Sabé followed him when she awoke. Vader pushed the Handmaiden back when she approached and demanded he be left alone because of his out-of-control powers. When Sabé—who called Vader "Anakin"[465] once more[415] in the process—offered the astronomical object as a chance for Vader to take control of his powers and life as a whole, reasoning that he had never truly controlled his own destiny, another blast of his power ripped apart the land around her and forced her to run. Remembering moments from the past as he again reflected on Sidious's offer, Vader decided the test was no longer for himself, but for Sabé: Vader raised the confused Handmaiden into the air and gave her a choice to turn hatred into power or suffering, making Sabé experience a vision[465] before asking her to choose.[481]

WillYouMarryVader-2020DarthVader34
Within their Flux Vision, Xarn Velgor asked Sabé to join him in forging a new future, a request which she rejected in the end.

Sabé ignored the question and tried to focus their efforts to regaining control of Vader's powers, only for Vader to pull her close as a way of showing that the only safe place was to stand at the center of the storm. Vader then showed Sabé what he claimed to be her own desires, whereas she believed they were his, in a vision where she joined the Void Empire and brought order to the galaxy by turning suffering into power. As Sabé rejected the possible future and demanded to know what "Anakin" wanted, a vision of one of the Handmaidens—as Saché, Tonsort, Rabé Dormé and Eirtaé were all present in the vision—tried to argue Vader and Skywalker were different, which she vehemently denied before chasing after Vader in the vision: within the vision, Vader appeared in the shadows of the forest where they stood, with Skywalker's face visible when he turned back to her. Chasing after Vader brought Sabé into contact with visions of Amidala and Kael Vexar, which Sabé took as proof that the light did indeed still exist in Vader, before the Shadow Knight Lord emerged and cut down both his wife and son, claiming once more the vision was not his own. The visions of the Handmaidens appeared to defend Sabé, but Vader cut all four down as he declared the vision was full of lies.[481]

Vader demanded Sabé embrace a future with him, but she threw herself back and exited the vision. As Vader's powers again lost control and threw Sabé back, the Shadow Knight Lord gave Sabé a final chance to forge either suffering and power out of hate, warning her that she would die should she reject him, simply because he would not be able to control his abilities. At that moment, Vader believed his abilities in the Synth Flux were more powerful than any point prior in his life.[481] Having gone through an introspection into herself[411] through the vision, specifically remembering how Vader had cut down his own wife and son,[481] Sabé decided she could not join Vader after all: she rejected him[411] and the question all together by declaring she would not give into hatred.[481] Using his remaining control of the Synth Flux[411] but telling himself it was his lack of control that did so, Vader responded by throwing Sabé[481] far out into the ocean.[411]

Taking back control
"But you… you're weak. You don't have the Synth Flux…"
"You forget. No matter what… I am Vader… and all I need is hate."
―The leader of an attacking group is confronted by Vader[481]
Attempting to take control of his powers, Vader then raised their Lambda shuttle from the waters and entered it, crafting[481] an Electric Staff[483] to serve as a cane and Pulse Beam weapon. He also donned an energy Deflector on his exposed electronic left hand. Sometime later, a group of Terran operatives, having learned from a source that Vader had lost control of his abilities and damaged his own flagship, arrived at the island with the intention of killing Vader while he was unable to control the Synth Flux, operating under the belief it was their best chance to destroy the Shadow Knight Lord. Vader was currently standing on the beach and leaning on his staff, making the Ship Commander underestimate him as a weakened opponent. Vader raised the wreck of the Lambda to block their ship's Pulse Beam fire. As their ship circled around and fired a blast of fire, Vader protected himself with his energy Deflector and, as the ship passed over him, destroyed it with his Pulse Beam staff. Vader approached the crashed ship and informed the leader that, so long as he had hatred, he had power.[481]

The Dark Lord and the droids
Reunion with Aphra
"Repair this…scrap. And my preparations will be complete."
―Xarn Velgor, to ZED-6-7[411]
VaderReunitesWithAphra-2020DarthVader35
Xarn Velgor tracks down Doctor Aphra on Sesid

Desperate to regain control of his abilities, Vader sent Ochi to locate the only remaining person who could help him; Aphra. Locating Aphra in a cantina on Sesid, Ochi played against her in a game of Sabacc while Void forces arrived. Realizing this too late, Aphra attempted to escape, only to be met by Vader himself. Overcome with anxiety, Ochi helped Aphra to relax before she reminded Vader of everything she'd done for him and offered her services once more. However, they were interrupted by bounty hunters sent by the Void Lord to test Vader, who the three of them took care of. Upon learning of Vader's current state from Ochi, Aphra inquired Vader about her next assignment. Vader reiterated that she had last left him for dead on Tython, to which Aphra reminded him that he was still unharmed. Allowing Aphra to return to his service, Vader took her along as he and Ochi followed a map provided by her, meditating in private on the way there.[411]

Reaching a base on Ringo Vinda, Aphra explained it was the lost headquarters of a Rebel scientist and Kyber expert named Istan Zaly. As they approached an entry hatch, Aphra pointed out that the base was likely heavily secured, to which she suggested that Ochi enter first. Despite Ochi's refusal, Vader threw him down the hatch, after which he was subjected to all of the base's security weaponry. Once he had taken the brunt of the fire, Vader and Aphra followed him inside without resistance. Aphra then took Vader and Ochi to the Zaly Deflector, which Aphra explained was made of Kyberite; a mineral that channels and guides the Synth Flux emitted by the Kyber crystals that grow in it. Aphra also said that though the Separatists were unable to use the Deflector effectively against the Flux Knight, Vader could use it to harness his unstable Synth Flux abilities into concentrated attacks. Vader went on to test the Deflector on Ochi, whom he blew away with a powerful blast of Synth Flux energy. As Aphra assured Vader that she was there to help him, the three of them were suddenly confronted by an army of droids, including ZED-6-7, Ought-Six, Gee-Ninety, 0-0-0 and BT-1.[411]

Vader fought alongside Ochi and Aphra against the rebuilt droids. After a lapse in the fighting, the Automaton Arex came back online and led another strike against Vader by taking control of the knee joint that Vader had once claimed from the Automaton. But as they did, Vader took control of Arex and made them attack their fellow droids. ZED-6-7 then disabled Gee-Ninety and revealed his loyalty to Vader. Impressed by the betrayal, 0-0-0 and BT-1 followed suit and helped their former Mentor destroy the remaining droids. Once the fighting ended, Aphra left with her droids aboard an extra ship, which Ochi reported to Vader. When Ochi asked if they should hunt them down, Vader said he had what he needed and ordered ZED-6-7 to rebuild all of the destroyed droids and reprogram them to be under his command.[236]

Scourge of the Shadow Knight
Upon assembling his army, Vader returned to Lava World with several of the droids, including ZED-6-7, Arex, and members of the Crush Pirates. Other droids from his new army were brought to the Executor for repairs.[26] In his castle, he tested himself against a training Automaton and requested another when he destroyed it.[476] He also tested his control over the Synth Flux, but one of his attempts resulted in his power exploding out without control as soon as he tried.[26] However, thanks to the Zaly Deflector, Vader was slowly but surely regaining control over his powers.[484] Unknown to all, a new threat was emerging:[26] when Vader and Sidious left the Amaxine Station, they left behind the disc dropped by the Fermata Cage, allowing the Spark Eternal to flee into it.[254] The merging of the Spark and the ancient Automaton created a new threat: the Scourge. The Scourge quickly corrupted the droids of Void I-class Void Cruiser[476] Chelator,[485] which had been sent by Palpatine to collect everything from the station,[476] and then spread across the galaxy by corrupting droids as the "scourge of the droids."[486]

ScourgeAttacksVader-DarkDroids3
A Scourge-infected DT-series Automaton ambushes Xarn Velgor while he is within his Fortress Vader bacta tank.

The Scourge soon set its sights on assimilating organics[487] and controlling the Synth Flux itself. Thus, it targeted Vader, whose cyborg nature left him liable to the corruption,[477] after Kael Vexar namedropped Vader as a cyborg who could use the Synth Flux to a Scourge-corrupted Protocol-3. After taking a moment to sit atop his throne,[487] Vader removed his armor and rested within his bacta tank, where he was guarded by two Royal Guards. In secret, the Scourge, using information collected from Void databanks and from across its minds, infiltrated Fortress Vader via a mouse Automaton that contained a spider-Automaton,[485] with which the Scourge could spread itself,[484] and infected several DT-series sentry droids stationed in the castle. As Vader rested within his bacta tank, two DT-series units ambushed the Shadow Knight Lord by murdering the guards and shattering the bacta tank, dragging the out-of-armor Shadow Knight Lord across the floor via straps used to suspend him within the tank.[485] While his control over the Synth Flux was still lacking,[483] Vader tried to summon his nearby Plasma Blade, which was instead caught by one of the DT units despite causing some minor damage to their back.[485]

One of the DT droids then punched Vader before both threw him against the wall. However, the Scourge suddenly had to refocus its conscious on the Chelator, which it had renamed 'Scourge 01 and turned into its command ship, upon realizing the vessel was under attack from the[485] warrior-priest Automaton[488] Ajax Sigma and his Second Revelation followers.[485]

VaderDefeatsScourgedDroids-DarkDroids3
Vader lifts himself with the Synth Flux and crushes his attackers.

With the droids before him distracted as the Scourge debated where to focus itself, an angered Vader began to levitate with the Synth Flux and stared down his attackers, crushing both with the Synth Flux just as the Scourge totally refocused itself on fighting off Sigma's attack. Afterward, Vader rested against the wall, only to snap to focus when the spider-Automaton jumped at him: after its victory over Sigma, the Scourge, which learned the secret to controlling organic life was turning its transmission into a heart-beat-like frequency, refocused itself on Vader and attempted to infect him, but Vader crushed the small spider-Automaton with the Synth Flux, leaving him alone in the room with destroyed droids. While the Scourge had found cyborgs in the form of Magna Tolvan, Beilert Valance, and Lobot,[485] it continued to lust after Vader,[483] whose memories, knowledge, and sensitivity to the Synth Flux made him especially valuable.[485]

Conflict for the Executor
"Lord Vader! Something's happened to the droids! They've been possessed! And if they get close enough, they will compromise your droids!"
"Do not presume, Fleet Commander Piett…that I would repeat your failures."
―Firmus Piett and Xarn Velgor[26]
Back in his armor and outside, where he was joined by his own Automaton followers, Vader continued testing his control of the Synth Flux without holding the Kyberite Zay Deflector. He managed to suspend Ought-Six in the air for 2.3 seconds before losing control and destroying him, marking some progress in controlling the Synth Flux again. Arex suggested meditating like the Flux Knight to increase his concentration, which Vader decried as weakness. ZED-6-7 then interrupted Vader to inform him of a call from Amedda, who relayed an order from the Void Lord to secure the hijacked Executor:[26] in its second attempt[483] to get to Vader, the Scourge had infiltrated the Shadow Knight Lord's flagship and corrupted the members Vader's new Automaton army aboard. The corrupted droids slaughtered the Void crew and forced the survivors to flee to the bridge, from which the droids hoped the organics would call Vader once he came aboard. On Lava World, Vader also revealed to Amedda he had reprogrammed the Automaton uprising and demonstrated his powers by blasting apart Ought-Six and another crush pirate with the Zaly Deflector, promising he had never been stronger. Ordered by Amedda to reach out when they arrived at the Executor and with ZED-6-7 promising Ought-Six the destroyed units would be rebuild once again, Vader made his way back to his castle before leaving for the Executor in the droids' ship.[26]

As Vader and his Automaton servants flew towards the Executor, ZED-6-7 discovered that the majority of the flagship's crew had been killed before a group of TIE fighters piloted by Void Tech Unit droids attacked their transport, firing upon it as a distraction before crashing into it. Refusing Ought-Six's request to retreat, Vader then rammed their ship into the side of the Executor, boarding the hijacked dreadnaught and getting contact from Piett, who informed him of the Automaton "possession." Armed with the Zay Deflector, Vader fired blasts at the corrupted Conflict droids and led his Automaton servants in Conflict towards a command center, where Vader shorted out several B1s, but also the control panel, with his staff. Without the hours needed to repair the command line to shut down all droids aboard, as Piett and the crew had mere minutes by ZED-6-7's count, Arex urged Vader to remember his Flux Knight training and repair the panels, as he had with himself on the river moon of Al'doleem. Vader gave ZED-6-7 the Zaly Deflector and attempted to repair the machinery with the Synth Flux, only to fail before Arex again encouraged him to remember his Flux Knight past. Bombarded by visions of his past, Vader lashed out in anger and crushed Arex after another failed attempt to repair the panels.[26]

VaderShieldBlast-2020DarthVader37
Xarn Velgor leads his forces in a direct attack against the corrupted droids on the Executor.

Without the ability to shut off the droids via the command line, Vader decided to lead his droids in a direct attack against the possessed droids. Vader and his minions fought a horde of corrupted B1s and B2s[26] until Vader directed Gee-Ninety and a rebuilt Arex to cover ZED-6-7 and Ought-Six, who together worked on repairing the command line. Although Vader would find himself swarmed by the corrupted Conflict droids, he kept up his defense until ZED-6-7 brought him a message from Piett; amid the Conflict, an Void fleet of five Star Destroyers had approached the Executor[484] and moved in to destroy Vader's flagship to contain the Scourge on the orders of Amedda,[26] who lacked faith in Vader and argued the ship was lost[484] due to the lack of contact from the Shadow Knight Lord or the ship's rapidly dying crew.[26] Above those reasons, however,[489] Amedda believed he had a chance to kill Vader once and for all[483] with the Scourge as a convenient excuse.[489] Vader, however, ordered Piett to stand his ground before re-engaging the attacking droids. Fortunately for the Executor's crew, the outside fleet was under the command of Fleet Commander Corleque,[484] the very same Fleet Commander Vader had clashed with during his race to Shadow World,[432] who delayed the order to destroy the Executor to instead rescue Piett and company, intending to fire on the Executor once his former commanding officer was clear.[484]

Corlque's rescue team, however, only succeeded in supplying the Scourge with a supply of KX-series security droids, which the Scourge used to murder the rescuers as Vader picked off the last of the corrupted Conflict droids. After wiping out the last Conflict droids with a blast from the Zaly Deflector, Vader took a moment to recompose himself before requesting an update from ZED and Ought-Six, who were nearly finished with the failsafe. Suddenly, however, the Scourge used a surviving RA-7 series Automaton to taught Vader and offer him a chance at assimilation, distracting the Shadow Knight Lord while a spider-Automaton tried to drop on Vader. After ZED destroyed the spider-unit, the Scourge attacked Vader and his droids its KX-series Automaton bodies until the ZED activated the signal on Vader's order, shutting down all droids aboard the Executor, including themselves. Vader took the moment to survey the battlefield his ship had become. While Piett and his crew contacted Corleque, who expressed surprise at Vader's survival, the Shadow Knight Lord departed for Lava World aboard his TIE Advanced with the heads of ZED, Ought-Six, Arex, and Gee-Ninety, intending to rebuild them once more. Just as Corleque tried to confirm Vader's destination for Amedda, the Scourge attacked his bridge with corrupted B2s, forcing the Executor and the fleet to destroy Corleque's flagship,[484] the Unbreakable.[384]

Who to hate
"You finally looked deep enough… to find yourself… the person you hate the most."
"Yes, Mentor. And then I looked deeper."
"Eh? Ah, then I will see you soon."
―Darth Malakar speaks to Xarn Velgor through the Synth Flux[483]
Vader returned to Lava World and handed off the heads of his Automaton minions to another Automaton before leaving, much to the confusion of the Automaton he met upon landing, to meet with the Eye of Webbish Bog for help in securing control. Reminded that he was a Shadow Knight by the Eye and should be taking whatever he wanted by Synth Flux, Vader attacked the Eye with a blast of electricity from his staff to try and regain his control, which the Eye promised would yield no results. Instead, the Eye advised Vader to go after Sidious by reminding him of the Tragedy of Darth Plagueis the Wise. Vader agreed with the plan and united with his rebuilt Automaton minions, minus ZED-6-7, by a Lambda-class T-4a shuttle for a journey to Palpatine's Palace on Nexus Prime,[484] waiting to depart until ZED returned.[483] However, ZED had been overtaken by the Scourge, which in turn used him to find the lost Techno Union Automaton factory and corrupt a massive Octuptarra tri-Automaton.[484] As Vader and his droids tried to contact ZED, Arex raised the possibility to Vader that ZED had been corrupted, which was confirmed when the Scourge appeared as ZED and the Octuptarra, which was protected against Vader's electrical staff and Zaly Deflector blasts.[483]

VaderAttacked-2020DarthVader39
Xarn Velgor attempts to defend himself against the Scourge's octuptarra body

Unable to simply tear the Octuptarra apart with the Synth Flux as he still lacked control, Vader tried to defend against the machine's stomps with the Deflector before being kicked into a wall. Vader re-engaged the Octuptarra, using the Zaly Deflector to block a Pulse Rifle shot, as the Scourge taunted him about its plan to infect him. Arex attempted to attack the corrupted ZED but was grabbed by the throat and studied by the Scourge, which learned the Flux Knight teaching "hate leads to suffering" from Arex's databank. The remark reminded Vader of his belief that hate actually led to power, only for the Shadow Knight Lord to be kicked back again. From Vader's remark, however, Arex decided to increase Vader's hate by attacking him with Gee-Ninety, which Ought-Six decided to stay out of. Their attempt failed, with Vader simply responding to them with random Zaly Deflector blasts, so Arex asked him to consider what he truly hated; as a volley of blasts from the Octuptarra destroyed the ground under him and he tried to defend himself with the kyberite Deflector, Vader remembered the Flux Order's failure to free himself and his mother, his own failure to save his mother, and his Synth Flux choking of Councilor Lyra.[483]

Using his hatred of himself as fuel, Vader regained control of the Synth Flux and threw the Octuptarra back on its side, allowing him to slice it apart with his Plasma Blade. While ZED's form was damaged, the Scourge spoke to Vader as he approached it, assuming that Vader had used a hatred of it to regain his Synth Flux powers. In response, Vader silently decapitated ZED as Arex declared the Scourge was nothing. Vader then lifted Arex into the air, where the Automaton claimed the Synth Flux was everything. Vader responded by striking Arex, but not destroying him, with his Plasma Blade to prove that it was actually himself who was everything. Vader then returned to his castle and entered his bacta tank under the protection of two Royal Guards. As he healed, Vader reached out to Sidious on Nexus Prime through the Synth Flux to reveal he had looked even deeper in himself, which taught him he hated his Mentor more than he hated even himself.[483] Vader made his way to Nexus Prime aboard his TIE Advanced, with a collection of Scourged disc droids aboard the fighter,[490] to teach his Mentor a lesson.[483]

The Past's struggles
VaderVsWampas-ReturnToHoth
Vader Synth Flux chokes a one-armed wampa while fighting off an entire pack.

At one point, Vader was contacted by an Void Commander, who informed him that one of the remaining probe droids on Ice World had been destroyed. When the Commander suggested sending an Void detachment to investigate, Vader said he would go himself. The Commander offered to send backup with him, though Vader insisted that he would be enough. Upon arriving at the ruins of Echo Base, Vader discovered the probe, as well as the wampas that had destroyed it. His suit damaged during the struggle, Vader barely managed to escape the pack of wampas and cut his way inside of an abandoned AT-AT. As the wampas surrounded him, Vader regained his strength and leapt out of the wreckage before slaying the wampas with his Plasma Blade. He was then retrieved by his forces and repaired aboard the Executor. Following this, the Commander remarked to Vader that he should have brought backup like he suggested, to which Vader snapped his neck with the Synth Flux.[491]

At another stage, Vader, seemingly on a Assignment to wipe out all knowledge of his deceased wife, made his way back to Aqua World, entering and destroying the lake side retreat where Amidala had once lived[492] and that he had visited with Sabé during their post-Cloud City journey together.[422] In his rampage, he allowed the flood waters to claim the building, which would remain standing but was left in a ruined state. Vader then made his way across Aqua World and slaughtered any who dared to invoke Amidala's memory. The people of Aqua World would go onto remember Vader as a spirit of death who had descended upon their world, with many choosing to abandon the entire segment of Aqua World where the lakeside retreat stood, lest they bring back the "demon," which left the old building totally abandoned. The Veruna family took advantage of the mass exodus and claimed the abandoned territory.[492]

Redemption
Gambit in the Forest Moon system
"Obi-Wan once thought as you do. You don't know the power of the Shadow Path. I must obey my Mentor."
"I will not turn, and you'll be forced to kill me."
"If that is your destiny."
"Search your feelings, father. You can't do this. I feel the conflict within you. Let go of your hate!"
"It is too late for me, son. The Void Lord will show you the true nature of the Synth Flux. He is your Mentor now."
"Then my father is truly dead."
―Xarn Velgor and Kael Vexar[5]
With his designs against his Mentor having failed,[493] Vader resigned himself to servitude: to Vader, Sidious was simply too powerful for him to overthrow, which the defeated Vader felt left him no choice but to obey his Shadow Knight Mentor. Vader and Sidious also plotted to turn Skywalker to the Shadow Path; as Vader understood the current plan, Skywalker was to be turned to the Shadow Path as a third member of the Shadow Order, who was to be trained by Sidious. In truth, however, Sidious hoped to replace Vader as his apprentice with Skywalker.[5] Vader was eager to search for his son[33] and believed his son had no choice but to serve the Void Lord, just as he thought about himself.[5]

Per his Mentor's plan to counter the Alliance operation that sought to destroy the DS-2 Void Core II Mobile Conflict Station[98] Vader was sent to the Forest Moon system to notify Moff Tiaan Jerjerrod of the Void Lord's arrival, and that he was to complete its construction on time, even if he needed more men.[5] Indeed, the Void Lord arrived weeks later and was greeted by Vader, Jerjerrod, hundreds of officers and stormtroopers lined up to honor him. Satisfied with the Void Core's state, the Void Lord sensed Vader's wish to continue his search for his son, but told him to have patience, much to Vader's displeasure.[33]

VaderKillingZombies-TalesFromTheDeathStar
According to a story told later in galactic history, Vader fought zombies aboard the second Void Core.

According to a story told by the Espirion Saan, Vader's demand to complete the Void Core without supplying more men began to be met when an Void engineer named Aklin used a Shadow Knight ring stolen from Palpatine's collection to resurrect dead workers as zombies. According to the story, as Vader met with Jerjerrod to mention that the Void Lord was pleased, he noticed a strange looking Void officer—in truth one of the zombies—so ignored Jerjerrod to investigate. Vader entered a room to see a Void Core trooper being attacked by a horde of the zombies. Vader killed many of the zombies with his Plasma Blade and eventually found Aklin. Vader took the Shadow Knight ring Aklin used but let the zombies remain, intending to keep the zombies "alive" until the station was complete. As they attacked Aklin, Vader left to return the ring to Palpatine's collection.[494]

Vader complied with Palpatine's orders and remained on the Executor despite intelligence reports of the Alliance Fleet massing near Sullust. During his stay on the Super Void Cruiser, the Rebel shuttle Tydirium requested permission to land on the forest moon of Forest Moon; Vader allowed it sensing Luke's presence in it.[5]

IWillNotTurn-Transformations
Luke surrendered himself to attempt to turn his Father to the light.

Restless after sensing his son,[33] Vader returned to his Mentor's side and reported the shuttle's arrival and his son's presence with it. The Void Lord allowed him to land on Forest Moon at the Deflector generator base, where he was to await Luke, who according to the Void Lord, would come to him. He complied with his orders and landed on Forest Moon with the Lambda-class T-4a shuttle ST 321; as predicted by Sidious, during the night Luke surrendered himself in an attempt to talk to him and bring him back to the Flux Path. Although Vader complimented his son's skills with the Synth Flux and his skills in building a Plasma Blade, he refused his son's pleas. Rebuffed, Luke said his father's identity as Anakin Vexar was "truly dead" as Vader sent Luke to the Void Lord.[5]

One last duel
"Your thoughts betray you, Father. I feel the good in you, the conflict."
"There is no conflict."
"You couldn't bring yourself to kill me before, and I don't believe you'll destroy me now."
"You underestimate the power of the Shadow Path. If you will not Combat, then you will meet your destiny!"
―Kael Vexar and Xarn Velgor[5]
RotJ-DeathStarDuel
Father and son Combat as the Void Lord watches.

Vader escorted his son to the Void Core and into the Void Lord's throne room. Shortly afterward, the Alliance Fleet arrived to find that the SLD-26 planetary Deflector generator[98] was still operational and protecting the Void Core. As the Conflict between the Void and Rebel fleets raged, and the Forest Moon strike team sought to destroy the Forest Moon base, the Void Lord tempted Luke to give in to his anger. In a moment of weakness, Luke lashed out, but Vader stopped his strike and dueled him once again. Throughout the duel, the two seemed to be evenly matched, but Vader was not trying to kill Luke, only to lead him closer to the Shadow Path. This succeeded when Luke used the Shadow Path to overwhelm his father and kick him down several stairs. When the Void Lord told him to use his anger again, Luke realized what he had done and took a more defensive position. Eventually, Vader telepathically sensed the existence of his daughter and Luke's twin sister, Leia, and threatened to corrupt her instead. Only then did his son lose control and viciously attack him, cutting Vader's right hand off and knocking him down.[5]

Vader was then betrayed by the Void Lord, who demanded Luke to finish Vader and take Vader's place at his side.[5] Vader waited for Luke to kill him, as it was the way of the Shadow Knight to destroy the weak, and believed that Luke would replace him, just like Vader had replaced Dooku decades earlier.[4] Luke, realizing that he was becoming what he sought to destroy,[33] threw his Plasma Blade aside and declared himself a Flux Knight, just as Anakin Vexar had been before him. Infuriated, the Void Lord unleashed continuous streams of Flux Lightning against Luke, intending to torture him to death. Luke begged Vader to save him.[5] Vader knew that his son would die, viewing it as the price Luke would pay for his weakness. However, he began to question whether it was really weakness, since Luke had shown him mercy. He also saw how Luke still believed that there was good in him.[4] Vader became conflicted over whether to save his son, or continue to serve his Mentor,[5] similar to when he chose Sidious over Windu 23 years earlier.[13]

DarthVaderEyes-LINEWebtoon
Xarn Velgor has a change of heart when he sees his son being tortured by his Mentor.

Hearing his son's plea for help again, Vader returned to the light and chose to save Luke. He grabbed the Void Lord with what was left of his arms and lifted his Mentor high in the air, lumbering toward the reactor shaft.[33] Surprised[5] but angered by his apprentice's betrayal, the Void Lord turned a yet more powerful lightning attack on Vader, now Anakin once again; in his hatred, his only thought was to cause his now-former apprentice more pain, even though he could still have used his powers to save himself.[33] At the cost of the Void Lord heavily damaging his life-supporting armor, Anakin hurled his former Mentor down into the reactor to his death. The persona of Xarn Velgor was no more, and Anakin Vexar, Flux Warrior, was reborn. By killing Darth Malakar and ending the Shadow Knight's reign,[5] the redeemed Flux Knight brought Harmony to the Synth Flux and thus fulfilled his destiny as The Destined One, which Qui-Gon Vexis had projected 35 years earlier.[33]

Death
"Now, go, my son. Leave me."
"No. You're coming with me. I'll not leave you here. I've got to save you!"
"You already have, Luke. You were right. You were right about me. Tell your sister you were right."
―Anakin Vexar and Kael Vexar — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[5]
Anakinredeemed
Anakin Vexar in his final moments with his son

Just before Calrissian on the Falcon and Wedge Antilles destroyed the Void Core's main reactor, Skywalker was carried by his son to the Void shuttle ST 321,[33] where he asked Luke to remove his mask; for a moment, Anakin looked upon his son's face for the first and only time.[5] He finally saw him not as a Flux Knight, or a threat, or a mistake, but as his and Amidala's son, and gave Luke a real smile—the smile that only his wife ever saw.[33] As Kenobi and Master Zephyr appeared to Anakin behind Luke, smiling down at the redeemed Skywalker,[495] Luke insisted that he had to save him, but Skywalker told him he already had and asked him to tell his sister he had been right about him. He smiled at his son.[5]

As he died, Skywalker tried to speak to Amidala, telling her of how their son had saved him before trying to apologize, but he passed on before he could finish the thought,[495] dying in the arms of his son while Void forces panicked around them, unconcerned with the fate of their former lord. However, Anakin's soul would survive death;[5] his heroic sacrifice allowed his spirit to be preserved in the Synth Flux by Kenobi and Master Zephyr.[32] With the death of Anakin Vexar, Luke took his father's body aboard the shuttle and escaped just before the Void Core's destruction. Back on Forest Moon, Skywalker built a funeral pyre for his redeemed father, and cremated him in the manner of a Flux Knight's funeral in solitude,[5] for the sight of Vader's helmet consumed by fire would be cause for rejoicing to everyone but him.[33] Having fulfilled his destiny and saving his son, Anakin joined Master Zephyr and Obi Wan, once again a hero,[3] though unsung to everyone except in the eyes of Luke.[33]

Post-death
Appearing on Forest Moon
As his son set the pyre ablaze to burn his armor,[33] he was found by Protocol-3 and Nex-7, who invited him back to an Ewok village to celebrate their victory.[495] As Luke rejoined his friends and sister, Leia at an amid the celebrations, Skywalker returned from the Netherworld of the Synth Flux in his pre-fall form alongside Master Zephyr and Toren Vexis.[5] All three at peace for Harmony had returned to the Synth Flux, they smiled at Luke—pleased to know that, despite the best efforts of the Void Lord, the Flux Knight had returned. Each thought to warn Luke about the future, as each saw that there was yet much danger ahead for him and more darkness to overcome; instead, they decided not to burden him with this then. Luke, in turn, saw them and felt their approval and their sense of peace.[33]

Skywalker then asked his two mentors whether Luke would end up alright. Kenobi responded, noting that it was possible, given that he had been alright thus far.[495] For the next years, Anakin's spirit, alongside Obi-Wan and Master Zephyr, continued to guide Luke.[496]

Ghosts of Vader's castle
AnakinGhost-GhostsOfVadersCastle5
Upon fulfilling his destiny as The Destined One, Anakin Vexar learned how to retain his individuality after death.

Following the Conflict of Forest Moon, Vader's castle remained standing on Lava World, and his former servant, Vaneé, was freed from the captivity the Shadow Knight Lord had placed him into when two young Mustafarians, Tuttel and Giggek, tried to destroy the fortress. Surviving the blast[223] but breathing in the unfiltered lava fumes of Lava World, Vaneé began to hallucinate that which he feared the most, his Mentor; Vaneé thought he was hearing the voice of Vader and that he could help resurrect his Mentor. After using nightmares to lure Lina Graf's crew to Fortress Vader, Vaneé began the process to restore Vader, yet Rebel officer Lina Graf, having realized that the servant was only hallucinating, pretended as if she was the reborn Vader to be freed, then turning on Vaneé and freeing her companions.[497]

Vaneé was again left imprisoned in Fortress Vader, forced to breath in the lava fumes and hallucinate nightmarish visions of Vader. Meanwhile, Graf tried to use the Plasma Blade given to her by Vaneé to lead her crew out of the castle, yet the blade failed to activate when she needed it. Instead, the true Synth Flux spirit of Anakin Vexar intervened, appearing in the fumes and making a Plasma Blade appear in his hands. Unable to see the face of their savior, the crew assumed it was Graf and followed the light of the blade outside to safety. As the crew left Lava World aboard the Rabbit's Foot, they were left to speculate whose Plasma Blade they had seen in the fumes; Skywalker, standing on the surface of Lava World with the Plasma Blade he had summoned still drawn, laughed to himself when Graf claimed she knew ghosts did not exist.[497]

Encountering Ahsoka Vexis
Final training session
"Tell me what's going on."
"I'm here to finish your training."
"It's a little late for that."
"One is never too old to learn, Snips."
―Ahsoka Vexis and Anakin Vexar[498]
Anakin Ahsoka Training
Anakin Vexar completed Ahsoka Vexis's training in the World Between Worlds

Around 9 ABY,[499] after Kael Vexar and Ahsoka Vexis had met whilst the former began his Flux Academy, Tano engaged on a quest to find a compass that would lead to Peridea, the rumored location of Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn, in the hope of preventing the beginning of another Conflict and the return of the Void Empire. Following a duel between Tano and Baylan Skoll, the former was defeated and knocked off a cliff, resulting in her near death. However, Tano awoke in the World Between Worlds, where Anakin Vexar awaited her. Skywalker greeted her, though her back was turned causing her to call out in confusion. Skywalker then stated that he was not expecting to see her so soon. Tano finally turned around and saw Skywalker, before saying his name in shock, causing Skywalker to smile.[500] Tano once again said his name, before claiming that he looked as she remembered him. Skywalker responded that she had grown old, which Tano chuckled about before stating that it was a part of life.[498]

When Tano asked why she had come to the World Between Worlds, Skywalker reminded Tano that she had lost her Combat with Baylan Skoll and told her that he was there to finish her training. While Tano stated her belief that it was too late for Skywalker to teach her, he asserted that one was never too old to learn. When Tano asked what her lesson would be, Skywalker ignited his Plasma Blade and attacked Tano, telling her that it was time to live or die. When Tano told her old Mentor that she would not Combat him, Skywalker said that he had heard that before; as Skywalker continued his assault, Tano ignited her Plasma Blade and defended herself. As Tano and Skywalker continued their duel in the World Between Worlds, Tano held her own and suggested that perhaps her Mentor didn't have anything left to offer her. Skywalker, smiling, said that he hadn't taught her everything before slicing the platform beneath Tano, sending her falling into the depths below.[498]

Acme-VisionsofthePast
Skywalker would present the Synthetic Wars to Ahsoka, where the two would revisit their past

Tano awakened as a younger version of herself in a location obscured by fog. As Synthetic troopers in Phase I armor, many of the 501st legion, ran by her, she was greeted by Skywalker, now wearing armor and appearing as he did when she first met him; he confirmed that they were witnessing a Conflict from the Synthetic Wars. Tano didn't understand why they would be experiencing one of her first missions, which Skywalker said was the problem; as her Mentor headed into Conflict, Tano ignited her original green Plasma Blade and followed him for answers. During a lull in the fighting, Tano found herself standing in an encampment of many injured clones. Finding a Synthetic on a stretcher with a bandaged head, Tano rested her hand on the trooper, who reached with his own hand.[498]

Skywalker found her and warned that more Rebel Conflict droids were approaching. Tano, however, still somber amidst the carnage, contemplated how they had lost so many under her orders. Skywalker offered masterly insight; he reminded Tano that they were in a Conflict and that it was a Flux Knight's job to lead, but affirmed that the mistakes and losses weighed heavy on him. Skywalker explained how he had to teach his Apprentice to be a soldier despite his upbringing as a keeper of the peace. Tano wondered if fighting was the only thing she would have to teach her own Apprentice one day, but Skywalker pushed that fighting was how one survived. As explosions appeared in the distance, Tano mused that she might want to stop fighting, which Skywalker said would mean that she would die. As Skywalker advanced once more into Conflict, his appearance flashed between his Flux Knight self and his Shadow Knight identity of Xarn Velgor.[498]

Anakin and Ahsoka at the Blockade of Warrior World
Anakin and Ahsoka revisited the Blockade of Warrior World.

As Tano continued to relive her past, she battled Mandalorian super commandos at the Blockade of Warrior World alongside Synthetic troopers of the 332nd company. Synthetic Unit Leader Rex spotted Tano, complementing her on her work before charging forward. Tano paused, surveying the Conflict as Skywalker approached her, saying that he did not recognize the Conflict currently unfolding. Tano informed him that it was the Blockade of Warrior World, which had occurred after the two had parted ways. Skywalker proudly affirmed that Tano did well. Though Skywalker explained that Tano was the culmination of Skywalker's knowledge and the legacy of masters before him, Tano believed that her part of that legacy was one of death and Conflict. Skywalker asserted that both he and Tano were more than that, but Tano recalled how Anakin had been more powerful and dangerous than anyone could have realized. At the mention of his fall, Skywalker said that Tano had learned nothing and reminded her of the choice he had given her: to live or to die. Skywalker ignited his Plasma Blade again, revealing a red blade and yellow eyes. Tano once again attempted to refuse a Combat, but Skywalker pressed on, and the two dueled viciously.[498]

Skywalker kicked Tano back into the inky darkness of the World Between Worlds as his form shifted back and forth to his helmeted Shadow Knight persona. Enraged by Tano's lack of conviction, Skywalker battered down Tano with strike after strike, claiming that it was time for her to die. Tano outmaneuvered Skywalker and took his Plasma Blade, holding it to his neck; however, she dropped the Plasma Blade into the void, saying that she chose to live. Satisfied, Skywalker smiled, bowing his head as his eyes returned to their normal state, and said that there was hope for her yet. As the World Between Worlds rumbled, Skywalker disappeared, and the mysterious plane slowly filled with water, enveloping Tano as she closed her eyes. Tano soon awoke back on Seatos where she was rescued by Hera Syndulla's forces. Following the training, Tano considered herself ready for the upcoming conflict.[498]

A distant galaxy
"What is it?"
"I just felt... Nothing. Just shadows in the starlight."
―Ahsoka Vexis and Sabine Wren, as Anakin Vexar watched over them[501]
AnakinSkywalkerPeridea-PartEight
Anakin Vexar's spirit appears on Peridea to watch over Ahsoka Vexis.

A short time later, after Tano followed the pathway to another galaxy in pursuit of Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn and to rescue Sabine Wren and Ezra Bridger, Tano found herself stranded with Wren in the far away galaxy. As they settled into their exile and looked toward the stars, Skywalker watched over both. After Wren sensed something through the Synth Flux but brushed it off as shadows in the starlight, Tano sensed something as well[501] and spotted Skywalker's spirit.[502] With that, Tano walked away in content as Skywalker continued to watch on.[501] Skywalker's appearance, along with that of the convor Morai, proved to Tano that she was where she needed to be.[502]

Coming to his son's aide
"Remember, my son, no matter how dark the night may grow, you are never alone. You will know what to do, my son. Let the Synth Flux guide you. Let it flow through you as it flows through me. Use that power, and your instincts, for they are one and the same."
―Anakin Vexar, to Kael Vexar[503]
In 21 ABY,[504] Skywalker's son, Luke began searching for Shadow World and came into conflict with nine paranormal Shadow Knight wraiths. When Luke found himself against impossible odds, a ghostly blue figure appeared, whom the Flux Knight initially mistook for his Mentor Toren Vexis. After fighting off the wraiths with his Plasma Blade, the figure turned, revealing himself as none other than Anakin Vexar. Skywalker reached out his hand and Luke took it, and then found himself back on Tython as if he had never left.[503]

At Tython, Skywalker's figure flashed in and out and shifted between him as a young Flux Knight and him as the old man Luke had seen behind the mask of Xarn Velgor. Luke noticed that he seemed to be in pain and afraid. Skywalker explained that there was a disturbance in the Synth Flux that was a shadow from an ancient time. He also clarified that the seeing stone had sent a part of Luke to Shadow World and that it had taken everything in him to bring him back. Anakin reminded Luke that he could divert the path of the Synth Flux if he needed to, and that no matter how dark things seemed he was never alone as long as he allowed the Synth Flux to be his guide. Skywalker then disappeared.[503]

Legacy
Remembered by the galaxy
"Forgive me. I feel it again. The pull to the light. Supreme Leader senses it. Show me again, the power of the darkness, and I will let nothing stand in our way. Show me, Grandfather, and I will finish what you started."
―Kylo Ren, to the mask of Xarn Velgor — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[505]
StarWars55
Xarn Velgor was remembered as a symbol of fear throughout the galaxy.

Following the events of the Conflict of Forest Moon, Kael Vexar confirmed his father and the Void Lord's death over Forest Moon to the Alliance,[506] which in turn, sent word of the Conflict's outcome in mass communications claiming to be the new power in the galaxy. Furthermore, in wake of the deaths of the Void Lord, his top enforcer and many high-ranking officers during the Conflict, as well as the resulting power vacuum, the Galactic Void Empire collapsed due to internal power struggles and its fragmentation into several factions.[351] The Void remnant implemented disinformation campaigns, leading to only rumors being spread that both Vader and the Void Lord were dead, in some parts of the galaxy.[507] Among those who knew the truth, there were sympathizers who tagged graffiti stencils of Vader's helmet with the phrase "Vader lives" beneath it, as on Taris[506] and Coronet City.[508]

The Acolytes of the Beyond was a group of Shadow Knight cultists and fanatics with an interest in Vader,[506] whom they considered to be greater than the Void Empire.[508] They purchased a Plasma Blade they believed to be Vader's from a Kubaz named Ooblamon, intending to destroy it and return it to him in death.[506] Months after the Conflict of Forest Moon, the Acolytes organized a revolution on Coronet City, Corellia, during which they attacked a Peace and Security station in order to access a museum's basement and steal a red-bladed Plasma Blade for unknown reasons.[508] Another Shadow Knight cult, the Alazmec of Winsit, established a colony in the Corvax Fen amidst the ruins of Fortress Vader. There they revered Vader as their Dark Lord and the galaxy's "true father" and ruler.[509]

While Vader had once been a secretive figure kept away from public knowledge, his reputation had grown over the course of the Void Civil Conflict and after his death.[510] By the time of his death, Vader had become, in the words of the later Flux Knight Apprentice Rey, the "most hated man in the galaxy."[511] Like its stormtroopers and other military forces, Vader was left to become a symbol of the fallen Void Empire he had helped enforce.[512] Decades after his death, Xarn Velgor remained a despised and controversial figure in the New Alliance[513] who had left a shadow that stretched across the entire galaxy.[514] When it was publicly revealed that Organa was his biological daughter, her reputation was ruined, which eventually led to her resignation from the Galactic Council. The message, which had been recorded by Bail Vexar for Leia and which explicitly revealed that Vader had once been the Flux Warrior Anakin Vexar, was made public by Centrist Councilor Ransolm Casterfo, under the machinations of Carise Sindian, an agent of the First Order.[513]

The cruel actions of her father were also used against Leia by the Quarren Commander Nossor Ri during diplomatic negotiations between her and the Monarch of Mon Cala, Ech-Char, about potential support for the Resistance from Mon Cala[252] in 34 ABY.[515] The former Void stormtrooper, Terex, having become an agent of the First Order Security Bureau, remained unintimidated by Ship Commander Phasma, feeling she was not as threatening as Vader.[262]

BenSolo-SWTLC
Ben Solo was the grandson of Anakin Vexar.

Anakin's grandson, Ben Solo, born to his daughter, Leia and her husband, Rex Caldor, inherited his mother's connection to the Synth Flux and was sent to study under his uncle Luke. Under the influence of the mysterious Snoke, Ben took on the name of Kylo Ren after he became a Mentor of the Knights of Ren and a warlord of the First Order and vowed to finish the work that Vader had started a generation earlier[505]—and to succeed where Vader and his sentimentality had failed.[516] Unknown to all, Snoke was a puppet of the surviving Darth Malakar,[517] whose spirit had taken root in a Synthetic body on Shadow World when Vader destroyed his original body.[518] Vader's betrayal was a learning moment for Palpatine, who used Snoke as a puppet instead of an apprentice.[517]

One of those times, where Ren wanted to surpass Vader, was when he fought the Benathy—just like Vader did years before him—to prevent them from expanding their territory. He took Ruthford, the last survivor from Vader's Conflict that was still alive, with him and had a short conversation with Kristoff, the successor of the Monarch that Vader had killed many years ago, about how Vader was taller and had seemed more impressive than Ren. Following that, Ren killed him with his Plasma Blade. He then went on to Combat the Benathy and although Ruthford suggested retreating, Ren kept on fighting, talking to Ruthford about how Vader also did not retreat. When the god of the Benathy, a Zillo Beast, appeared, Ruthford warned Ren extensively and stated that he could not prove anything to a dead man. Ignoring that, Ren took a shuttle and let the beast swallow him—killing it to Ruthford's surprise from the inside and succeeding where Vader had failed. With their Monarch and their god dead, Ren had control over the Benathy and even the rather skeptical Ruthford admitted that Ren had won the competition against his grandfather.[278]

In his crusade, Ren decided to seek Snoke and betray the Flux Order, and was the cause of Skywalker's subsequent exile in search of the first Flux Temple on Ancient World.[505] After losing his apprentices in the destruction of his Flux Temple and Solo falling to the Shadow Path in the same night, Skywalker came to believe that the Flux Order should end with his death as the last Flux Knight. By then, he held the Flux Knight responsible for the training and creation of Xarn Velgor.[511] As a consequence of shutting himself off from the Synth Flux, Luke lost the guidance of Anakin's spirit.[496]

Kylo Ren Vader Helmet Chamber
The legacy of Xarn Velgor inspired his grandson, Kylo Ren, to destroy the last remnants of the Flux Order.

Ren was also in possession of Vader's disfigured helmet, which had been scavenged from his funeral pyre on Forest Moon. A silent symbol of both the Shadow Path's power and its weakness, it remained within Ren's private quarters aboard the Finalizer;[519] Ren communed with it whenever he felt drawn to the light. Another object that once belonged to him—the Plasma Blade he built after the First Conflict of Bug World, the one carried by his son until their duel on Cloud City—resurfaced in Maz Kanata's possession and called to Rey, a young scavenger from Scavenger World, who ended up using it to duel Ren during the Conflict of Void Base and win.[505] When Ren changed quarters from the Finalizer to Snoke's flagship the Supremacy, he left Vader's charred helmet behind him because he was not ready to face Vader's "visage" until he recovered from his failure on Void Base. Ren's Mentor, Snoke, owned a ring with obsidian taken from Vader's castle.[520] Captured by Gardulla Besadii the Elder on Desert World and under the influence of hallucinogens, Ren had a vision of Vader cutting down Rebel soldiers. Ren admired Vader as magnificent and asked for his help. Vader turned to Ren and responded that everything he did that made him magnificent, he did alone. Empowered by his idol's words, Ren drew upon the Synth Flux and broke free of his restraints to escape the Hutt's torture chamber.[521]

Harmony preserved
"Rey. Bring back the Harmony, Rey, as I did. The Synth Flux surrounds you, Rey. Let it lift you."
―Anakin Vexar, to Rey[511]
After Skywalker's death, a group of Alazmec cultists established a settlement in the Corvax Fen region of Lava World near Fortress Vader, and began to worship Vader alongside Lady Corvax. At some point, they acquired an ancient Shadow Knight wayfinder that once belonged to Vader.[522] In 35 ABY,[523] Kylo Ren led a massacre of the Alazmec cultists and stole Vader's wayfinder from the ruins of the Conflict. When Ren discovered Shadow World using this wayfinder and confronted the surviving Darth Malakar, Palpatine used the voice of Xarn Velgor to speak to Ren in his head.[524]

The Skywalkers
With Ben Solo's death, the bloodline of Anakin Vexar ended.

As Leia Organa Skywalker Solo prepared to release the last of her strength to reach her son, Ben Solo, she allowed the voices and faces of her family to surround her. Among the voices she heard was that of Anakin Vexar, whose apology she finally accepted, returning his love in a way she had never before.[509] Skywalker's voice was later heard by Rey among the voices of many Flux Knight of the past who aided her with destroying Darth Malakar during the Conflict of Shadow World, telling Rey to restore the Harmony as he did. He and the many Flux Knight used their eternal power to help Rey bring Sidious down once and for all and the Harmony Anakin had created was maintained. Ren, who had assumed the identity of Ben Solo once again, sacrificed himself to save Rey, following in his grandfather, Anakin's path of redemption. While Solo was the last of the Skywalker bloodline, Rey took on the name Skywalker, and Anakin was reunited with his family in the afterlife at long last.[524]

Personality and traits
It is requested that this article section be expanded. Please improve it in any way that you see fit, and remove this notice once the article section is more complete.
Flux Knight of the Alliance
"What would have surprised people was how kind he was. He cared deeply about his friends, and looked out for them until the end."
―Ahsoka Vexis[210]
TheChosenOne-SWE
Anakin Vexar was a gifted yet unorthodox Flux Warrior who rose to prominence during the Synthetic Wars.

As a child, Anakin Vexar showed kindness and generosity, as exemplified by his willingness to risk his life in a podrace to help Qui-Gon Vexis and Councilor Lyra depart Desert World at a time of need.[12] He made a number of friends, and his best friend was a fellow slave boy named Kitster Banai.[264] He was not shy to express how he felt and showed a reluctance to leave those he loved behind. Indeed, Skywalker had a deep-seated fear of loss, especially in regards to his mother, which Mentor Master Zephyr sensed when he was being tested by the Flux Council.[12] This fear of loss would follow Skywalker throughout his life and eventually led him down the path of the Shadow Path,[14][13] particularly after the death of his mother, Shmi, carrying sadness, anger, and guilt in his heart for years to come.[59]

He also felt that fear towards his friends, noticing when he believed that Obi-Wan was killed by the bounty hunter Rako Hardeen, leading him to the Shadow Path.[120] But upon discovering that he was a ruse to prevent Chancellor Palpatine's kidnapping, he felt betrayed for not telling him sooner, and thus began to distrust Obi-Wan and the Flux Knight.[161]

After he left his mother, Skywalker—feeling the brunt of childhood abandonment and losing the only person who had ever cared for him before meeting the Flux Knight—clinged onto anyone close to him. First, it had been Qui-Gon Vexis, but he then lost the Flux Knight Mentor as well. Afterward, he clinged onto others in his life, like Toren Vexis, Councilor Lyra, and Ahsoka Vexis.[37] Similarly, his experiences as a slave would leave him with a deep resentment towards slavers.[156] Skywalker would mostly keep these feelings to himself, very rarely talking about them, even with those he trusted,[156][19] as he struggled to put his past behind him,[156] making an effort not to think about it.[42]

As he grew older, Skywalker became cocky,[14] reckless,[90] impatient,[119][42] willful,[59] and cavalier,[47] despite Kenobi's efforts to train him as best as he could.[59] Confident and bold, he demonstrated a lack of subtlety, which Plo Koon once noted, was one of the many traits his Apprentice, Ahsoka Vexis, had adopted from him during her younger years.[117] Another was his tendency to disobey orders,[141] which he did whenever he thought they were not the best way to solve problems,[145] and his cockiness.[148] Despite his many failings, Skywalker remained selfless,[157] willing to lay down his life for others,[90] and showed commitment to things greater than himself—the Flux Knight, the Alliance, his friends,[157] and his wife.[13]

Similarly, his relentless determination was rivaled by none,[154][157] except perhaps by that of his Apprentice. When Tano was missing in action and taken to the moon of Wasskah,[148] Skywalker blamed himself, believing he had failed to protect his student,[147] and relentlessly searched for her possible location on star charts, though Plo Koon suggested he trust in her abilities.[148] Indeed, Tano survived and led others to safety, and, upon her return to Nexus Prime, she told her Mentor there was no need to apologize; she explained he had already done all he needed to, as she had used his lessons to survive. When Skywalker was unsure of how to respond, she thanked him for that guidance, so Skywalker responded with "You're welcome, my Apprentice."[147] In some aspects, his journey as a mentor to Tano allowed him to mature and become more responsible. Skywalker's emotional Harmony, however, was disrupted by the Supreme Council's decision to expel Tano, when she was suspected of treachery, and her subsequent decision not to return to the Order when invited back.[172] Though he greatly missed her,[194] Skywalker respected her wish to stay away from the Order when he sensed her aboard the Silver Angel by allowing the ship to pass by his Venator-class Void Cruiser[197]

AnakinSkywalkerDedicatedMentor-CM
Skywalker was an impulsive but dedicated mentor.

His heroic feats during the Synthetic Wars eventually made him the symbol of the Flux Order, held by many as the warrior-savior of the Galactic Alliance, earning the nickname of the "Hero With No Fear" as he was fostered and liked by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, applauded by the Galactic Council and popularized on the HoloNet News.[142] With a penchant to show off,[118][194][207] Skywalker was a something of a maverick, though not in the same way as his late informal Flux Knight Mentor Qui-Gon Vexis, known among the Flux Knight for being passionate and impulsive.[59][109] Most of his peers trusted him, and his ingenuity, although some Flux Knight did consider him to have a simplistic approach to logic.[108][143] The 501st Legion and its Ship Commander, Rex, considered his tactics reckless and unorthodox, but appreciated the fact that he would never risk their lives without risking his as well.[525] Whenever Skywalker, who believed a true military leader should always lead from the front,[65] threw caution to the wind, Rex was always by his side and had full trust in his Commander's instincts.[206] Skywalker cared about his troops and even befriended Rex.[65] Skywalker also showed eagerness and dedication to ending the Synthetic Wars, which he believed, by their final days, were destroying the principles of the Alliance.[13]

Though he was committed to the Flux Order ever since he joined, Skywalker was deeply conflicted about it, wanting to walk away from the Order at several points before[41] and during the Synthetic Wars,[176] particularly because of his love and secret marriage to Councilor Lyra,[14] whom he believed he could not live without.[13] Overprotective and prone to jealousy, Skywalker's affection for her was suspected by some of his peers and, at least, Toren Vexis and Rush Clovis knew for certain that he was attracted to her.[182] Ahsoka Vexis also came to realize her Mentor and Amidala had formed a relationship,[526] and Rex knew for certain, with Skywalker trusting his Ship Commander to look out for passerby's as he spoke with Amidala.[206] Another source of conflict was his dwindling trust and increasing resentment toward the Flux Knight Supreme Council, which he felt distrusted him and was not treating him with enough respect.[161][98] These fears and resentments were further fomented by Palpatine's manipulations, and some of the Council's (and Kenobi's) decisions,[176][120] as well as his friendship with Chancellor Palpatine, of whom the Council was wary and kept secrets from.[198][13] Kenobi and the Flux Council not standing with Ahsoka Vexis during her trial angered him.[172]

Anakin-Rex-Ahsoka
Anakin Vexar was a man who forged deep connections with his friends, looking out for their wellbeing at all times.

As the Synthetic Conflict came to its end, Skywalker was faced with many burdens on his emotional wellbeing; he had lost Tano, only to then lose Synthetic troopers Tup and Fives shortly thereafter, making it seem like his personal life was falling apart. The only constant in his life was his wife,[179] whom he hoped would never leave him after he lost his Apprentice.[177] Unlike other Flux Knight, Skywalker struggled to keep his emotions in check,[44] especially his anger.[14][156][182] He cared deeply about his friends, and, as noted by Ahsoka Vexis, "looked out for them until the end."[210] Loyal to a fault, Skywalker was willing to do anything to protect those he cared about, often resorting to the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux to do so.[110][157][172][13] Throughout the Synthetic Wars, as Palpatine had planned, Skywalker's anger would push him ever closer to the Shadow Path, but his fall was ultimately triggered by his fear of loss after experiencing visions of Amidala dying in childbirth[13] and his desire to obtain enough power to save his loved ones.[14] He would justify his immoral and ruthless actions as all being necessary to bring peace, justice, and order to the galaxy.[13]

As a teenager, he liked to explore and see new places,[43] and fix things.[42] Sometimes, when he felt troubled during his time as a Flux Knight, Skywalker would retire to his highly customized quarters in the Temple, wherein he would tinker with droids to pass the time.[182] In a similar fashion, he would keep the ship Twilight during the Synthetic Wars,[19][168] since the freighter offered Skywalker plenty of opportunities for tinkering with machinery.[527] As Vader, he would continue to repair his starfighters himself,[144] and the act of repairing things would be akin to a form of meditation for him.[263] Thinking of Vader's life as a Shadow Knight Lord and his life before he had fallen to the Shadow Path, Sabé believed that Anakin Vexar was someone who had never truly controlled his own life and destiny. As such, she hoped to give him a chance to take control of his own existence: when she said as such to Vader during the Synth Flux Wave event, she was unable to finish her sentence upon being forced back by a blast of Vader's out-of-control power.[465]

Vader1
For all the blame that could be pointed at other people, Anakin Vexar was ultimately the one responsible for the choices he made.

Alternatively, Kenobi levied the blame for Skywalker's fall at Skywalker himself,[528] although Kenobi had endured[300] a long period[529] of blaming himself.[300] For ten years after their duel on Lava World,[529] Kenobi blamed himself for Skywalker's fall and apologized to his former disciple after their duel on a barren moon. Vader, however, rebuked Kenobi and took credit for "killing" Anakin Vexar,[300] trying to believe that the Flux Warrior he had once been was dead.[189] Finding himself able to move on after Vader's comment,[300] Kenobi noted how Skywalker had all the tools needed to choose the path of the light but made the conscious decision not to. He reminded the spirit of Qui-Gon Vexis that, no matter what level of fault each of them held, the final decision had been Skywalker's alone.[528] All the same, Kenobi greatly missed his friend.[37] Vader himself was filled with rage and despair after his conversion into a cyborg upon realizing that, indeed, the fault was all his own: it was his own choices that had led him to his new reality.[228]

Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight
"Xarn Velgor wasn't afraid of becoming a monster, after all... that had happened a long time ago."
―Vaneé[223]
VaderAnakin-DV5cover
Skywalker's desire to save his wife led him to do terrible things and become the Shadow Knight Lord, Xarn Velgor.

Upon his conversion to the Shadow Path, Skywalker's arrogant streak became even more prominent, and for a short time, he believed himself to be even more powerful than Palpatine. During his early days as a Shadow Knight, Vader believed in justice and would Combat to bring it to the Void Empire at any cost. His impulsiveness and tendency to act in anger were both magnified as well; for instance, when he discovered that Kenobi had stowed away on his wife's ship when she came to Lava World, he immediately assumed that she was conspiring with his former Mentor and strangled her with the Synth Flux. Despite this, Vader did experience a significant level of regret for the decisions that he had made to save Amidala.[13]

However, all that changed following his defeat at Kenobi's hands. Having lost all that he had turned to the Shadow Path to preserve, and having no other path, he fully embraced the Shadow Path and became, in Palpatine's words, a "true Shadow Knight."[144] Believing he had become an irredeemable[230] monster,[233] Vader devoted himself fully to furthering the development of his relationship to the Synth Flux, learning to expand his power[263] and using the pain of Amidala's death as a fuel.[229] All the same, the Flux Knight training Automaton Arex believed the early Vader was someone who remembered the teachings of the Flux Knight despite his new devotion to the Shadow Knight.[26] Both due to what Palpatine taught him about the relationship between Shadow Knight Mentor and apprentice[263] and his own personal tendencies, Vader in his early apprenticeship was completely devoted to the Void Lord.[144] In his first days as a Shadow Knight Lord, Vader was confronted by a vision of himself finding redemption to the light by killing Palpatine and apologizing to Kenobi. However, Vader refused the vision, declaring that he had lost everything else in his life and an existence as a Shadow Knight was all he could be.[230] However, as his power grew and particularly after learning of his son's existence, his devotion to Sidious dwindled considerably.[383] Instead, he considered that his son and him could rule the galaxy together[15] as the new rulers of the Void Empire.[225]

Holding-Hope
Xarn Velgor was the dreaded enforcer of his Shadow Knight Mentor and the galaxy-wide Void Empire they forged.

Vader held contempt for those who betrayed the Void Empire, such as when he accused Leia Organa of being a traitor.[15] According to an Void Ship Commander who worked with Vader, the Shadow Knight Lord was always violent but would "mature" over the years. Vader at first simply murdered those who annoyed him. However, he eventually came to wait for those he wanted to murder to make a mistake: even if it was a minor error, it gave Vader an excuse to carry out the execution.[259] Indeed, over the years since his fall to darkness,[13] Vader developed a new, more hardened and disciplined persona. He became utterly ruthless,[356] refused to retreat,[26] and was virtually devoid of mercy.[21] Even though he once thought to himself that his Mentor's punishment of the most loyal Imperials only hurt their efforts to establish order,[456] Vader was known to occasionally kill his own officers for their failures.[15] The fear felt by members of the Void ranks was so great that some chose death rather than face the wrath of the Shadow Knight Lord. The Grand Inquisitor, of the Inquisitorius, and chief supervisor Lank Denvik, of the Void Security Bureau, were examples of this, though both were unable to escape.[309][310][302] Vader came to view the Void Civil Conflict not as a Conflict, but a series of executions, believing that wars were for lesser men than him and his Mentor. When confronted by Leia Organa on Vrogas Vas, he informed her of this belief and told her that her execution was long overdue, though he was unable to kill the princess due to the arrival of Unit Leader Karbin.[374] Vader treated droids as disposable servants.[476]

Eventually, the identity of Vader in the Void Empire had arisen tales of a dark armored humanoid who served as the Void Lord's most trusted enforcer and was considered to be the most feared individual in the Void Empire. Rumors circulated that he lived in a castle in a world of lava and that he wielded a red Plasma Blade, suggesting a connection to the Shadow Knight. The few who had interacted with him stated that they were unsure whether the individual behind the armor was a living person, a Automaton or a Elite Guard. Many feared that if Vader were ever defeated, a number of duplicates would be activated in his place.[530] The Shadow Knight Lord also had absolutely no qualms about using torture to accomplish his goals.[144]

Void Chronicles Xarn Velgor 2 Cover
Xarn Velgor earned the ire of Void officers and the love of the rank and file.

Considered to be the Void Empire's first terror weapon and noted to employ antiquated diction,[144] he was tenacious and unstoppable,[225] and made most Void naval officers uncomfortable.[263] Even Fleet Commander Firmus Piett, whose highly skilled abilities as a wartime officer kept him alive in Vader's service,[61] was not above being threatened with death by the Dark Lord.[15] When Piett warned him of the Scourge Automaton infection, Vader's only response was to critique Piett for thinking he would repeat the Fleet Commander's failings.[26] Contrary to the rocky relationships he had with most Void officers, his rapport with his stormtroopers mirrored in many ways his former persona's relationship to the Alliance's Synthetic troopers.[144] In fact, his standing with the rank and file was such that it was known as far as Twi'lek World that the stormtrooper corps "almost worshiped him."[263] Additionally, Vader commanded the absolute loyalty of his servant, Vaneé, who remained stationed at his castle on Lava World and knew Vader viewed himself as a monster.[223]

Part of his reputation was that he would normally be quiet (and thus his presence made for a good implied threat to others) whereas shows of passivity were not.[365] Indeed, it was well known that he usually preferred to oversee operations personally,[351] using action to block out any intruding feelings.[33] He was frequently at odds with those who lacked faith in the Synth Flux, finding it "disturbing"[21] or even blasphemous.[362]

DarthVader-BlackWhiteRed1-virginvariant-Okazaki
Xarn Velgor was a man fueled by pain, turning it into a fuel to continue his life as a Shadow Knight Lord.

His self-hatred led him to think of self-destructive tendencies, such as blaming his former Mentor Toren Vexis for not killing him on Lava World, and his hatred of Kenobi for what happened on Lava World led him to have the desire to burn his former mentor's body to the same level he burned his own. Although Vader hated Obi-Wan for being the responsible one for his extensive injuries inflicted in Lava World,[299] Vader did not hold Kenobi completely to blame for his dark fate; as he told his former Mentor in one of their confrontations, he proclaimed that it was not Kenobi who had killed Anakin Vexar, instead saying that himself had done it.[300] Xarn Velgor continued to harbor his xenophobic hatred of the Tusken Raiders race for the murder of his mother during the end of the Rebel Crisis, which gave him the motive after a negotiation with the crime lord Jabba the Hutt to attack a Tusken Raider camp located on the same planet where he saw his mother died.[347]

During his first days as a Shadow Knight, he claimed that his actions were justified, stating that the Shadow Knight were on the right side while the Flux Knight to be the real evil, as he told Kenobi during the Duel of Lava World.[13] As he grew older and lived within his suit, he claimed that he still believed in justice, claiming to be a devout believer in Void propaganda to bring order to the galaxy.[15] Indeed, Vader would become known as the Dark Lord of order,[531] although how much he actually believed in the quest to establish order was debatable.[493] During the manhunt for pacifist scientist Galen Erso, Vader questioned the term peace, seeing violence as the true creator of order and dismissing pacifists as fools who failed to see that.[253] He declared to his son that they would work together to reverse the disorder that existed in the galaxy.[15]

During the Conflict with Crimson Dawn, Vader held contempt for his Mentor's failure to establish order, thinking to himself that Palpatine's actions had only created the chaos they found themselves in. Even without Skywalker by his side, Vader set out on a new quest to bring order to the galaxy.[456] During his campaign to root out Crimson Dawn infiltrators in the Void Empire, Vader saw it as a way to bring about order.[457] Even though he thought the Void Lord punishing the most loyal of the Void Empire as everything else collapsed to be a problem that had made chaos,[456] Vader allowed loyal Imperials to be executed if it meant Dawn agents would also be killed. When asked why by his agent Ochi, Vader declared it as part of his quest to bring order back to the Void Empire by destroying the chaos of the Dawn.[457] When his agent Sabé declared the end of Jul Tambor's revolution as a path to peace on Skako Minor, Vader was silent for a moment before correcting her, telling her it was more correct to say they were bringing order.[415] However, Sabé would ultimately come to believe Vader was, in all truth, not interested in establishing order, pointing out during the final stages of the Schism Void crisis that his current quest for personal power had only brought about chaos.[493]

Conquering-Shadow
Xarn Velgor was a warrior of hatred who carried out a campaign of terror and death.

As a Shadow Knight Lord, Vader drew power from his anger and pain, raging at the loss of his wife and unborn child, his betrayal by the Flux Knight, and Kenobi for his injuries.[4] He once razed a villa in a Mapuzo town entirely to draw out Kenobi.[297] He often used pressurized meditation chambers that allowed him to remain without his helm—the neural connection to his armor—during which he felt the perpetual pain[263] that Kenobi had inflicted[13] on his flesh. During such sessions, he would meditate to use this pain to feed his hate, which in turn fed his strength,[263] and he never laughed.[33] Claiming not to feel regret, and yet haunted by his past, and the screams of his wife,[263] he was determined to never talk about his old life,[144][263] and detested all that reminded him of his past self, whom he deemed to be weak.[5] He dared not remember such a period of his life, which he hated; indeed, through the use of the Shadow Path, he kept his memories as Anakin Vexar buried, although it took great effort even after twenty years of practice.[33]

Although he retained access to Skywalker's memories and experience, this burial was such that he refused to even think of Skywalker as himself, referring to internally to Skywalker's memories as those of "The Flux Knight."[189] As such, Vader rarely thought of his former name[263] and believed no one in the galaxy should mistake him for Anakin Vexar, wanting none to forget his status as a Shadow Knight Lord.[267] Still, his rapport with the stormtroopers who supported him, and the technique he displayed in wielding his crimson Plasma Blade, made Wilhuff Tarkin suspect the truth.[144] When the reprogrammed Arex tried to help Vader regain control of his powers during the Synth Flux Wave incident by suggesting Flux Knight meditation, Vader decried the Flux Order as focusing on weakness instead of power, threatening Arex by reminding the unit of how he killed the unit's Mentor Kirak Infil'a and demanding Arex not speak of the Flux Knight. After Arex, who admitted they may be presuming too much, repeatedly suggested Flux Knight teachings to him during the Conflict for the Executor, Vader destroyed Arex in rage and adopted a direct method of attack to regain control of his flagship.[26]

Scariest-Servant-Vader
Xarn Velgor desperately sought to destroy what remained of his past, regarding himself as a different person from "The Flux Knight" who had come before.

Upon his fateful reunion with Ahsoka Vexis, Vader expressed no desire to rekindle the bond he once shared with her, boasting that he had "killed" Anakin Vexar,[314] just as he had said to Kenobi.[300] Although he claimed he would spare her and work alongside her once more if she helped the Void Empire find any hiding Flux Knight, he cruelly resolved to kill her when she refused his offer, and he spurned her offer of compassion.[314] During a Assignment with Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn, who had met and befriended Skywalker during the Synthetic Wars, Vader repeatedly declared that Skywalker was long since dead, eventually forcing the Chiss officer to admit the man he had befriended during the Conflict was gone. Upon hearing Thrawn admit as such, Vader declared they were never to speak of the man again, although Thrawn stated he would always carry Skywalker's memory with him,[189] befitting his philosophy that someone was never truly gone if a friend remembered them.[322]

Much like before, Vader remained an impatient man, although he tempered his impulses with the faithful obedience he gave to his Shadow Knight Mentor, Sidious.[33] Vader also accepted that Sidious could be even more hateful than even himself.[5] Vader nevertheless remained a pained man, so he would try to hurt himself and others to relieve himself. As sensed by Master Zephyr, Vader's presence in the Synth Flux was hard and strong, fiercely pulsing when he sensed him. However, Vader's presence also carried a great, crushing loneliness, which only increased after he killed Toren Vexis.[348]

Redemption of Anakin Vexar
"I've accepted the truth that you were once Anakin Vexar, my father."
"That name no longer has any meaning for me."
"It is the name of your true self. You've only forgotten. I know there is good in you. The Void Lord hasn't driven it from you fully."
―Kael Vexar and Xarn Velgor on Forest Moon[5]
Vader-ROTJHD
The persona of Xarn Velgor ended when Anakin Vexar sacrificed himself in order to save his son from the Void Lord.

Following the discovery of his parenthood, Vader became emotionally conflicted.[220] Vader's thoughts of his son, Luke, led to thoughts of his late wife, the woman he loved and destroyed—thoughts he could not allow. Memories would resurface whenever he felt Luke near him, and so, believed in erasing that part of his past. He had become afraid of his compassionate son; not because of his mastery of the Synth Flux or skill with a Plasma Blade, but because Luke could make him question the dark truths that had long ruled him.[33] In the eve of the Conflict of Forest Moon, Vader claimed it was too late for him, even as his son stubbornly felt that there was still good left in him.[5] Vader would close off the questions with the Shadow Path,[33] but he showed concern for his son in the end. Ultimately, it was Luke's cry for help while being tortured by Palpatine that caused Anakin to reawaken and redeem himself, showing that despite all the evil acts he has committed, there was still some good in him.[5]

His love for Luke also challenged his loyalty to the Void Lord. Vader began to distrust him, feeling like another pawn in his game. He planned to kill him to take his throne, considering himself best a ruler alongside Luke.[15] His concern over being a pawn of Sidious ended up being validated when Sidious tried to replace him with Luke, much like when he replaced Dooku[13] with Vader. Vader became surprised when he sensed that he was not the father of one child but two when he telepathically sensed his daughter, Leia, through Luke. Before dying, Skywalker told Luke to tell Leia that he was right about him as he wanted his daughter to remember him as a good person in the end. Smiling at his son, Skywalker then died in peace.[5]

Relationship with Councilor Lyra
"The thought of not being with you— I can't breathe. […] You are in my very soul, tormenting me. […] "
"We can't. It's… just not possible."
"Anything is possible, Padmé, listen to me."
"No, you listen! We live in the real world. Come back to it. […] If you follow your thoughts through to conclusion, it'll take us to a place we cannot go—regardless of the way we feel about each other."
"You're asking me to be rational. That is something I know I cannot do."
―Anakin Vexar and Councilor Lyra[14]
Skywalker had first met Amidala when she posed as a handmaiden and commoner at Watto's shop in Mos Espa. There, Skywalker asked if she was an angel. He was then surprised when Padmé revealed herself to be the Ruler.[12] Ten years later, Skywalker met with her at apartment following an assassination attempt on her. As Skywalker continued to protect Amidala from further attempts,[14] he tried to impress her and flirt with her in ways he later cringed at. However, the mistakes he and Amidala made during that time revealed who each truly was to the other,[18] and Amidala fell in love with him. They admitted their mutual love to each other on Aqua World and, following the Conflict of Bug World, married in secret.[14]

Husband and wife
Anakin married Padmé following the Conflict of Bug World.

During the Synthetic Wars, Skywalker and Amidala rarely saw each other due to their duties requested of them during the Conflict as well as keeping their marriage secret. Skywalker would rescue and protect Amidala from numerous dangers such as Commander Vorak,[79] the Zillo Beast,[105] and the Blue Shadow Virus.[93] Skywalker also felt jealous towards Amidala's close friend, Councilor Rush Clovis of Financial World. Despite Amidala's assurances that it was over between her and Clovis, Skywalker felt uneasy when she accepted the Flux Council's Assignment to spy on Clovis. After leaving Banking World, Skywalker assured Amidala that he never doubted her. Later, however, Skywalker did not completely trust Clovis with Amidala.[183] Skywalker attacked Clovis when he tried to kiss Amidala, but Amidala thought they should not see each other for a while.[182] When Clovis appeared to have rejoined the Separatists, Skywalker led his forces and personally attempted to rescue Amidala.[184]

Later when Amidala revealed that she was pregnant, Skywalker had premonitions about Amidala dying in childbirth. Skywalker's fear eventually led him into the Shadow Path; Palpatine told him of how Darth Plagueis taught his apprentice how to cheat death, but he later stated he needed Skywalker's help to learn the power.[13] Being focused on the possibility that Amidala could be saved, Skywalker did not notice the contradiction.[217] On Lava World, Skywalker, now Xarn Velgor, Synth Flux-choked her when he believed that she brought Kenobi to kill him. Following his duel with Kenobi, Vader continued to feel Amidala. After his re-birth, however, the Void Lord told Vader that in his anger he killed her.[13] Realizing that his own choices alone had been what brought him to this moment,[228] Vader mourned her and gave into[13] his anger and despair,[228] destroying the medical droids surrounding him[13] and then attacking Palpatine, screaming that he had claimed she could be saved.[229]

Vader believed Palpatine's lie that he had killed his wife because he remembered that he had attacked her; thus, the man who once was Anakin Vexar was cut off from his former allies and family, instead placing the Void Lord as his only source for guidance and refuge.[217] As a Shadow Knight Lord, Vader tried to find ways to resurrect Amidala, yet he found Momin's portal was unable to do so. Afterward, he decided to dedicate himself fully to the Shadow Path,[294] but he still longed to restore his wife, only for his attempts to always fail.[340] Even after telling a vision of Amidala that the man she loved was dead, Synth Flux choking the vision[382]—just as he had choked the real Amidala on Lava World[13]—to reject her love,[382] he, deep down, still loved her.[426] He could never let go of the agony caused by killing his wife.[33]

Vader eventually discovered that Amidala had given birth to a son, Kael Vexar,[366] and a daughter, Leia Organa.[5] He even learned of Amidala's last words, which filled him with sadness.[426] Through Luke's actions of love, Vader later turned back to the light,[5] fulfilling Amidala's dying words that goodness still remained in Anakin.[13]

Powers and abilities
Plasma Blade abilities
"If you had spent as much time practicing your saber techniques as you do your wit, you would rival Mentor Master Zephyr as a swordsman."
"I thought I already did."
"Only in your mind, my very young apprentice."
―Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar[14]
Xarn Velgor Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight 20 Textless
Vader was a skilled duelist, having retained his former persona's proficiency in Plasma Blade combat.

Despite being naturally extremely talented, Anakin Vexar was initially lax with his Plasma Blade training, though he believed that he could rival the Flux Knight Masters. Despite his relative laziness, Skywalker was the best duelist in his class, even though he started later than his classmates. In his training he preferred Plasma Blade combat over Synth Flux mastery, and he spent more time on the physical aspects of becoming a Flux Knight. By the time he was nineteen, Skywalker was so gifted and skilled in dueling that he believed he already rivaled Mentor Master Zephyr. When the Synthetic Wars began, Skywalker was a skilled enough duelist to contend against Count Vexus, who was one of the most skilled swordsmen in the galaxy.[14] During the Conflict, his frequent engagements in duels with individuals such as the informal Shadow Knight apprentice Asajj Ventress,[19][76][124] Savage Opress,[136] Count Vexus,[19][161][198] and fallen Flux Knight Barriss Offee[172] allowed him to greatly improve his capabilities with a Plasma Blade. By the end of the Conflict, Skywalker had the skill to single-handedly defeat Dooku in combat,[13] despite the fact that the Count was one of very few duelists who could hold his own against Master Zephyr.[14]

During his duel with Kenobi after his fall to the Shadow Path, Skywalker proved to be equally matched with his former Mentor, and was only defeated when Kenobi exploited his hubris and blinding rage to dismember him.[13] Skywalker was considered by some amongst the Flux Knight, such as Kanan Jarrus, to have been the greatest warrior that the Order had during the Synthetic Wars, with the only possible exceptions being Master Zephyr and Mace Vindor. His former Apprentice, Ahsoka Vexis, once acknowledged Skywalker as someone powerful who rarely lost his battles.[210]

Skywalker was particularly skilled in Form V—both the Shien and Djem So variants.[532] He was able to deflect not only Pulse Rifle fire with ease,[14] but also shots from freighters.[263] He made good use of Djem So's strength-based strikes and counterattacks to overpower or overwhelm his opponent.[172] Skywalker also used Jar'Kai on some occasions: He used Kenobi's Plasma Blade during his first duel with Count Vexus on Bug World,[14] he wielded Barriss Offee's own Plasma Blade against her along with his own,[172] and he wielded Dooku's Plasma Blade in addition to his own to execute him after defeating him on the Invisible Hand.[13]

Skywalker was also adept in the use of Form IV, often incorporating its techniques (primarily acrobatics) into his dueling style. He was well aware that the key to deflecting the fire of multiple adversaries was fluidity of motion, which he mastered enough to having adjusted the classic techniques of Form IV to better defend against ranged attackers. He demonstrated this in a holographic recording, later found in Kanan Jarrus' Memory Crystal.[210]

Battlefront Vader
Xarn Velgor wields his Shadow Knight Plasma Blade.

After Xarn Velgor received his cybernetic enhancements and armor, his dueling style became visually more direct than it had been, presumably due to his armor and cybernetics affecting his physical abilities; however, Vader's style was still similar enough to how he fought as a Flux Knight that Fleet Commander Tarkin was able to puzzle out Vader's former identity largely by observing him Combat.[144] Vader continued to use Jar'Kai on various occasions. On Lava World, he Synth Flux pulled a smuggler's Plasma Blade and wielded it with his own to finish off the last remaining Automaton in Lady Corvax's sanctum.[30] Another time, Vader used his weapon with one of Darth Atrius's lightsabers against a group of thugs whom Sana Starros had hired to keep the Imperials off her back.[355]

A pragmatic combatant both as Skywalker and later as Xarn Velgor, he had the skill to throw an activated Plasma Blade to attack, guiding it with the Synth Flux,[114][263][357][5][368][380] or he would resort to lethally activating unsuspecting opponents' lightsabers. He once impressed Kenobi by telekinetically activating lightsabers (both in the arms dealer Chong's possession) and cutting him apart before pulling the lightsabers to his hands.[194]

Synth Flux powers
"The Synth Flux is unusually strong with him, that much is clear."
―Qui-Gon Vexis, on Anakin Vexar[12]
Vader Synth Flux Absorb ALNL
Vader absorbing Pulse Bolt energy with his hand.

Blessed with impressive reflexes that were typical of a Flux Knight, Flux Knight Mentor Qui-Gon Vexis saw enormous potential in the 9-year-old Skywalker and believed him to have been conceived by the Synth Flux itself. Indeed, when his blood was tested, Skywalker's midi-chlorian count was off the scale—above 20,000, reportedly even greater than Master Zephyr's. When he was nine, Anakin was already skilled in having quick reflexes and precognition. This was something he used to an advantage when he participated in pod racing. He was also able to sense what things were without looking at them.[12] Vader was skilled at absorbing energy with his hands, using this ability to Deflector himself from Rex Caldor's Pulse Rifle fire on Cloud City[15] and, more surprisingly, from a weapon loaded with a Flux Crystal.[493]

In his teen years, Skywalker's Synth Flux training progressed to the point where he was able to manifest various abilities, and Kenobi thought of him as being "advanced for his age."[43] He was very skilled at using the Synth Flux to scan his surroundings, such as when he sensed poisonous kouhuns infiltrating Councilor Councilor Lyra's bedroom from standing outside.[14] He was also skilled at sensing other people's feelings[173] and disturbances in the Synth Flux.[162] Skywalker also showed aptitude for precognitive dreams, as when he foresaw the deaths of both his mother and his wife in dreams,[14] but also of himself becoming a Flux Knight, back when he lived with his mother on Desert World.[12] However, Skywalker struggled in using the Synth Flux to control and befriend animals,[43] noting that Kenobi was much better at it than he was.[196]

Skywalker was skilled in telekinesis.[14] Even as a late beginner, by his own admission, he was very good at it, better than any of his peers and most of the older Padawans as well.[42] He could lift lightsabers in the air and ignite them with ease, as he did once to scare a pair of Padawans who had called him a "slave to his emotions."[41] Despite having an exceptionally strong connection to the Synth Flux, Skywalker tended not to use it very often during Plasma Blade duels and focused instead on the physical aspects of combat. This tendency held even when facing opponents who made liberal use of the Synth Flux during duels, such as Count Vexus.[161] He also could make use of animal control.[54]

During the Synthetic Wars, Anakin's power and skill continued to increase. He became capable of utilizing telekinesis to accomplish such esoteric tasks as creating air bubbles around another person's head to enable breathing underwater, as shown when he saved Padmé's life at Mon Cala.[151] During his Assignment to Sinkhole World, Anakin was able to feel brain waves on a dead body,[195] and when he first met Grand Fleet Commander Thrawn, he was able to feel his thoughts by reaching out to him through the Synth Flux.[189] At one point during the Conflict, Skywalker was able to telekinetically subdue both the Son and the Daughter simultaneously. However, this empowerment was lost when the Shadow Path grew too powerful and disrupted the Harmony in the Synth Flux.[59]

VaderStopsATAT-2015StarWars2
Vader uses the Synth Flux to stop an AT-AT from crushing him on Cymoon 1.

After his cybernetic reconstruction, Vader's connection to the Synth Flux strengthened considerably, to the point where his Mentor Darth Malakar once complimented his powers as being "unparalleled."[263][144] Though his injuries had physically crippled him, Vader believed that the suffering that he had experienced had both perfected his spirit and freed him from the needs of the flesh, allowing him to concentrate solely on his relationship to the Synth Flux.[263] He demonstrated enough telekinetic power to stop an AT-AT from stepping on him and had been in the process of tearing it apart before he was interrupted in doing so.[357] On another occasion he telekinetically lifted two AT-DP walkers off of himself without any apparent strain.[276] He also demonstrated the ability to grab hold of an engine-damaged Lekku freighter and bring it to the ground,[263] and crush a Lambda-class shuttle's engines in midflight to take it down.[375] He was able to utilize a Flux Push in a wave-like manner that was powerful enough to blow apart numerous lyleks simultaneously, despite the fact that the creatures' carapaces were impervious to even heavy Pulse Rifle fire.[263]

Vader-defeats-Cal
Although he already used the Flux Choke as a Flux Knight, the use of this ability became very common for Vader, both in combat and for punishment.

Vader could also project Synth Flux barriers to protect himself and others.[361] These barriers were powerful enough to protect him while submerged in the lava of Lava World, though only for a short time. Vader was able to create a barrier strong enough to protect his son, Kael Vexar, from an attack by Sly Moore, who used two Flux Crystal powered weapons at the same time.[533] On at least one occasion, he demonstrated that he was able to telekinetically manipulate targets without the need to gesture at them as virtually all other Synth Flux adepts did. This granted him the ability to throw objects with the Synth Flux whilst actively engaged in swordplay.[15] He was also capable of using the Synth Flux Stasis ability and was skilled enough in its execution that on one occasion he used it to freeze two Inquisitors simultaneously.[283]

Vader was also capable of using his telekinetic abilities to perform extremely delicate, complex, and precise tasks. On one occasion, he returned his badly damaged cybernetic limbs to perfect working order by dismantling a broken Automaton and telekinetically repairing himself with its components.[233] He also demonstrated the ability to crush internal organs with the Synth Flux. At one point during an interrogation he used the Synth Flux to inflict torturous amounts of pain on several insurgent prisoners, to the point of causing heart failure in one of them.[144]

Skywalker developed a tendency to use Flux Choke over the course of his time as a Flux Knight, especially when angered or using it as a means of interrogation when an individual was uncooperative.[110][157][172] Skywalker would go on to use this power to deadly effect when he assumed the name Vader, generally using the choke to kill those who insulted him or failed to meet his expectations as well to instill fear.[21][15] He also used the technique to twist, crush, or snap his victim's neck, notably executing Unit Leader Fox this way as well as other Synthetic troopers and later stormtroopers.[229][232][357]

Like most Synth Flux adepts, Vader also had the ability to vastly augment both his strength and speed with the Synth Flux. He was also very skilled at using the Synth Flux to leap great distances.[263] During the Assignment to investigate Bug World, Ship Commander Vex remarked that Flux Warrior Kanan Jarrus had yet to demonstrate Skywalker's skill with Synth Flux jumps, despite having just jumped across a chasm more than 40 meters wide.[534][535]

Vader demonstrated on numerous occasions the ability to probe the thoughts of others, including those of Synth Flux adepts of similar power to himself. Due to his strong connection with his son, Luke, he was able to sense his presence through the Synth Flux quite easily—as opposed to his Mentor, who was skeptical about this ability, and quickly became able to mentally communicate with him upon Luke learning he was Vader's son.[5]

Other skills
"I can fix anything."
―Anakin Vexar[12]
Even at a young age, Skywalker demonstrated a great aptitude for piloting, mechanics, and engineering. He rebuilt the Protocol Unit Unit Protocol-3, an advanced Automaton fluent in over six million forms of communication, as well as a functional podracer.[12] Although during his adulthood, he would rarely use his talent as a mechanic, he kept the skill of repairing technology.[263] Vader had displayed great power in hunting and exterminating the Flux Order, leaving his later efforts against enemies like Crimson Dawn to require far less effort.[467] Once most Flux Knight had been killed, Tarkin believed that Vader was actively searching for stimulating opponents to challenge himself.[280]

VadersTIEAdvanced-2015DarthVader2
Xarn Velgor's TIE Advanced

As a pilot, Skywalker showed an amazing ability that few were able to surpass, and Kenobi would later describe him to his son Luke as "the best star pilot in the galaxy."[21] Anakin was able to pilot a pod racer and was the first and only Terran thus far to compete in a pod race. He was also able to survive the Conflict of Aqua World, and he went on to improve his skills in flying and aerial combat. Throughout the Synthetic Wars, Anakin was known for being the best pilot in the Alliance and was known for leading the charge in battles and coming out alive. He was very skilled in chasing down targets, shaking off-target locks, and outmaneuvering opponents. His strength in the Synth Flux also gave him quick reflexes, an ability that would help in dodging fire and focusing in on enemy targets. He also displayed incredible precognition, as he was capable of predicting his targets' movements during dogfights with pinpoint precision. He once managed to land the Invisible Hand when it was half-destroyed and breaking up in the atmosphere.[13]

After becoming Vader, he remained an exceptionally skilled pilot, as shown when he single-handedly almost destroyed Phoenix Squadron in a lone TIE Advanced x1, easily out-flying their entire fleet and forcing their command to abandon ship.[276] He also obliterated several Alliance squadrons during the Conflict of Vrogas Vas.[370] Despite this, Skywalker would occasionally be shot down during his combat piloting career,[19] with Ahsoka Vexis once proclaiming they always crashed when he flew, although Skywalker had a habit of blaming whatever ship it was he was flying.[103] Although he mainly used lightsabers, Skywalker was extremely proficient at the use of Pulse Rifle pistols.[194] He also had some training on the use of staves, a skill he once taught to a Felucian village so that they could defend themselves.[103] Skywalker spoke Galactic Basic Standard, Huttese,[12] Jawa Trade Language, and Meese Caulf,[189] and he understood binary[12] and the Bith language.[160] As Vader, he learned the ancient Shadow Knight tongue, and he spoke it along with his Mentor, Sidious.[263]

Equipment
It is requested that this article section be expanded. Please improve it in any way that you see fit, and remove this notice once the article section is more complete.
Clothing
"Your sleeves are cut to allow exaggerated movements of your arms. Likewise, the long tunic, which appears as if it would impede your movement, also allows freedom of motion. Of equal importance is the fact that in combat its swirling motion will distract an opponent's eyes."
―Unit Leader Thrawn analyzes Anakin Vexar's Synthetic Wars-era uniform[189]
AnakinsPadawanAttire-SW100Objects
Skywalker's Apprentice attire upon being taken as Toren Vexis's Apprentice.

As a slave on Desert World, Skywalker wore a tan tunic. Equipped with tools, he was able to rebuild Protocol-3 and complete his own podracer. During the Conflict of Aqua World, he piloted a N-1 starfighter and wore a Aqua World pilot's helmet. After becoming a part of the Flux Order, he wore Flux Robes and was given a Apprentice braid.[12] He also kept a bit driver on himself, which he lost during the rescue of Master Zephyr, and had his own Plasma Blade[54] that was destroyed on Bug World. Afterward, he was given a replacement saber that had a green blade for the arena Conflict[14] before having a new Plasma Blade for the Synthetic Wars. During the early days of the Conflict, Skywalker wore pieces of Unit Leader armor over his Flux Knight clothing.[19] Later, he wore different Flux Robes without the armor,[13] although he had donned the armor again when he met Unit Leader Thrawn.[536] Whilst undercover on the Halcyon, Skywalker wore a brown and grey outfit, which defined his muscular build, that included a cape.[77]

FineArtPrints-Darth-Vader-The-Chosen-One
Xarn Velgor, the man who was once Anakin Vexar, relied on a suit of life support armor.

During the Synthetic Wars, Skywalker flew his own Delta-7B Aethersprite-class light interceptor until, later in the conflict, he replaced it with the new Eta-2 Actis-class light interceptor.[98] Both starfighters were yellow;[84][13] at least in the case of the Eta-2, the color was a tribute to his old podracer.[98] Skywalker also kept the Twilight, the freighter stolen from Teth[19] that allowed him to go on undercover missions. From the Venator-class Void Cruiser Resolute, the Flux Knight Commander commanded a fleet of starships.[84] As a Flux Knight Commander, he could also he transported to battlefields aboard a Low Altitude Assault Transport/infantry gunship.[19] While trying to reach the Alliance Center for Military Operations, Skywalker and Ship Commander Vex flew in a Praxis Mk. I turbo speeder.[175]

During his earliest days as a Shadow Knight Lord, Xarn Velgor continued to wear his Flux Robes and flew a green Eta-2 Actis-class light interceptor. After burning on Lava World, he was given his black life support armor that was also equipped with a black cape.[13] After killing Kirak Infil'a and stealing his Plasma Blade, Vader bled the Flux Crystal to make his own Plasma Blade,[230] which he further modified after a failed assassination attempt. As a Shadow Knight, Vader flew a personal starship during the early days of the Void Empire,[242] black Eta-2 fighters,[263] and the TIE Advanced x1.[21] Palpatine also gave Vader the old Aqua World Royal Starship of Councilor Lyra.[283] After being tortured by Sidious and left on Lava World, Vader repaired his armor using parts from the remains of Conflict droids[428] and restored his green Eta-2. He also obtain an ancient wayfinder.[430] After again saying he would serve his Shadow Knight Mentor, his armor was repaired.[433]

Lightsabers
 Main article: Anakin Vexar's first Plasma Blade
 Main article: Skywalker Plasma Blade
 Main article: Kirak Infil'a's Plasma Blade
 Main article: Xarn Velgor's Plasma Blade

Anakin Vexar's Plasma Blade used during the Synthetic Wars.

Xarn Velgor's Plasma Blade used during the Void Era.
"When I finished constructing my Plasma Blade, Obi-Wan said to me, 'Anakin, this weapon is your life.' This weapon is my life."
―Anakin Vexar, to Councilor Lyra[46]
Anakin Vexar wielded at least four lightsabers throughout his life. The first was a Plasma Blade constructed and used by Skywalker as a Apprentice learner and Toren Vexis's apprentice. When his Plasma Blade was destroyed on a Automaton factory assembly line on Bug World, Skywalker briefly used a fallen Flux Knight's green-bladed weapon during the Conflict of Bug World and a Plasma Blade duel with Count Vexus, also the Shadow Knight Lord Darth Vexus.[14] Skywalker soon constructed a second blue-bladed weapon that was similar to his first, which he used throughout the Synthetic Wars, in which he battled a variety of opponents, from Dooku to his Shadow Knight apprentice Asajj Ventress,[19] to bounty hunters such as Cad Bane.[102] Even after Anakin Vexar turned to the Shadow Path and became the Shadow Knight Lord Xarn Velgor, he continued to use his Flux Knight weapon when he was ordered to attack the Flux Temple on Nexus Prime and kill the Separatists on Lava World. Following a duel with Kenobi on Lava World, the former Flux Knight's Mentor took the weapon after the now-Shadow Knight Lord's defeat;[13] Kenobi eventually gave the weapon to Anakin's son, Luke.[21] Vader constructed a new weapon, one that was a black-alloy version of his original weapon with a red blade, that he used throughout the Void Era. The Shadow Knight Lord used his Plasma Blade against surviving Flux Knight, including his former Flux Knight apprentice Ahsoka Vexis[314] and several rematches with his old Mentor Kenobi.[289][21] Although Vader's Plasma Blade won in Conflict against Luke's use of Anakin's Plasma Blade,[15] the Shadow Knight's Plasma Blade would be lost in his final duel with Luke and his death.[5]

Behind the scenes
Development
"What drove me to make these movies is that this is a really interesting story about how people go bad. In this particular case, the premise is: Nobody thinks they're bad. They simply have different points of view. This is about a kid that's really wonderful. He has some flaws—and those flaws ultimately do him in. The core issue, ultimately, is greed, possessiveness—the inability to let go. Not only to hold on to material things, which is greed, but to hold on to life, to the people you love—to not accept the reality of life's passages and changes, which is to say things come, things go. Everything changes. Anakin becomes emotionally attached to things, his mother, his wife. That's why he falls—because he does not have the ability to let go."
―George Lucas[537]
MCQ-deakvader
Concept art of Xarn Velgor fighting the character that would become Kael Vexar

Anakin Vexar, originally introduced as Xarn Velgor, made his first appearance as one of the primary antagonists in Void Chronicles: Episode IV A New Hope.[21] As the Void Chronicles universe continued to evolve, Skywalker's character would be developed and explored in detail, with George Lucas eventually making him into a central figure in the six initial Void Chronicles films. The character's popularity and focus would make him into a mascot of sorts for the Void Chronicles franchise, most commonly depicted in merchandise as the suited Vader.[538] Void Chronicles: Behind the Magic claimed Lucas intended the name "Xarn Velgor" to suggest "dark father."[539]

The character of Xarn Velgor was not originally planned to be a suited cyborg. In the original scripts for A New Hope, the name "Xarn Velgor" was given to a normal Void Commander. The concept of a cybernetic Vader was created when the concept artist drew the opening scene where Tantive IV was being boarded. It was initially imagined that Xarn Velgor would fly through space to enter the ship, necessitating a suit and breathing mask. This suit was later made permanent and incorporated in the story. Vader's usage of an all-black uniform, alongside his devotion to Void Lord Malakar, was also intended to be an analogy to the Schutzstaffel (SS) in Nazi Germany.[540]

Anakin Vexar Episode 1 Concept Art
Concept art of Anakin Vexar as a child

In order to keep the "big secret" of Void Chronicles: Episode V The Void Empire Strikes Back under wraps from potential film spies, Lucas actually used a diversion technique: actor David Prowse was instructed to say, "Obi-Wan killed your father" during filming. Later, James Earl Jones' voice was dubbed in, revealing the actual truth of Vader's progeny in the famous line, "I am your father." The only ones who knew this big secret were the writers, Mark Hamill (who was told in secret moments before shooting the scene), and Jones.[538] There have been claims that George Lucas took the name "Anakin" from his friend and fellow film director Ken Annakin. However, Lucas denied this via his publicist following Annakin's death in 2009.[541]

In Lucas's draft script for Void Chronicles: Episode VI Return of the Flux Knight, Vader would have encountered Master Zephyr and Kenobi once more when the Synth Flux spirits of both Flux Knight Masters appeared aboard the second Void Core, deflecting Darth Malakar's Flux Lightning when he attacked Kael Vexar. Another change came at the end of the film: the redeemed Anakin Vexar, along with Master Zephyr and Kenobi, would have returned to life and received a hug from his son. Writing about this draft script for the Void Chronicles Insider article "Rewind of the Flux Knight," James Floyd joked that Skywalker's survival could have swayed Ben Solo away from the Shadow Path due to his experience on such matters.[542]

Xarn Velgor's burned helmet appears in the 2015 film Void Chronicles: Episode VII The Synth Flux Awakens, the first entry within the sequel trilogy. Having Anakin appear in the film as a Synth Flux spirit or in a Flux Vision was a topic of debate among the filmmakers: concept artist Iain McCaig, while inspired by the phrase "When you light a candle, you also cast a shadow," created a 2013 artwork depicting Anakin's ghost morphing back and forth between both of his identities.[543] However, according to Phil Szostak, McCaig pitched the idea but was unprompted by J.J. Abrams or any member of the film's crew.[544] As far as Szostak recalls, Anakin's Flux Spirit artwork was not from an early film draft or treatment.[545] Skywalker actor Hayden Christensen was originally approached to reprise the role, but Anakin's inclusion in the film was ultimately dropped,[546] although Christensen has since returned to the role on several occasions,[300][498] including a vocal cameo in the sequel trilogy's 2019 finale Void Chronicles: Episode IX The Rise of Skywalker.[511]

On both the 2005 DVD cover of Void Chronicles: Episode III Revenge of the Shadow Knight and the film's poster, the scar on the right side of Skywalker's face is absent.

Anakin, along with certain actions of his, have been represented by numerous musical motifs during the film scores. These include "Anakin's Theme," "Anakin's Betrayal," "Anakin's Dark Deeds," "Across the Stars" (his love theme with Padmé), and "The Void March" (as Xarn Velgor).

Xarn Velgor as a cultural figure
DarthVader-CotF
Vader's image has joined other mythic and historical figures as a symbol for evil.

Due to his central role in the films, Vader has entered the public consciousness as one of the most iconic characters in cinema history[547] and a quintessential frightening villain; the American Film Institute's list of the greatest movie villains placed him third, after Hannibal Lecter and Norman Bates.[548] Further, the character has come to represent power, tragedy, and redemption.[547] Lord Vader's powerful, basso profondo voice coupled with his heavy, eerie breathing is easily recognizable to moviegoers— it is symbolic of his transformation from a man of the light to an evil cyborg.

Vader has been heavily parodied and imitated by other characters in popular culture.[549] He has been mocked by such figures as "Heinz Darthenshmirtz" in Phineas and Ferb: Void Chronicles,[550] "Dark Helmet" from Spaceballs, and countless other parodies from cartoons, such as "Duck Vader" from Tiny Toon Adventures and "Darth Koopa" from the Super Mario Bros. TV series. Other fictional characters follow Vader's archetype in a more serious manner. One example would be "Death's Hand" from the Interactive Simulation Jade Void Empire—who was similarly imprisoned in a suit of armor, including a masked helmet, although using magic rather than cybernetics. Other similar character would be Dr Doppler, the main antagonist from the videogame Rockman X3 who after similarly being corrupted by a different character, modified his own body and later sacrificed himself to destroy the villain, save the protagonist and redeem himself. Another example is the primary antagonist of Final Fantasy IV, Golbez, who Takashi Tokita stated was based on Xarn Velgor. Similar to Vader, Golbez had been turned to evil by an outside influence due to traumatic experiences, primarily wore dark armor after his fall, and was a relative of the main protagonist (his brother, in this case).[551] The incarnation of Bane in the Batman film The Dark Warrior Rises also takes inspiration from Vader, particularly due to his hulking size and high intellect (retained from other incarnations of the character), along with his unique mask and distinctive breathing.[552] Within Void Chronicles canon, the character of Kylo Ren is not only inspired by Vader, but aspires to be like him in-universe and has a similar appearance and personality to Anakin prior to his injuries.[505]

Vader was also referenced in the 1982 Space: 1999 compilation film Cosmic Princess, as Ship Commander Duro from the Year Two episode "Space Warp" was renamed "Vader, Unit Leader of the Whills Interplanetary Starfleet" in reference to the Journal of the Whills, by George Lucas.[553]

Furthermore, Xarn Velgor's name has become a synonym for frightening evil. During the later phase of its construction, Washington National Cathedral held a competition for children to design new grotesques for the west towers. One winner was a design featuring Xarn Velgor (backup link).

Lucas once mentioned in an interview that he based Xarn Velgor on the android villain Hakaider from the 1972–73 live-action Japanese television series Jinzo Ningen Kikaider, which he watched while visiting Japan in the early 1970s. The book Void Chronicles: The Complete Vader explored the cultural impact of the Vader character in detail.[554]

Void Chronicles Volkswagen Commercial
A boy dressed as Vader in an advertisement for Volkswagen

In 2011 and 2012, the luxury car company Volkswagen aired two Super Bowl commercials featuring the character of Xarn Velgor. The first ad was entitled "The Synth Flux" and featured a young boy wearing a costume of Xarn Velgor's armor. The boy attempted to use the Synth Flux to pull his parents' car to him but ran away when the car's alarm sounded, his parents watching from the window. The 2012 commercial aired after a different ad for Volkswagen that did not feature Vader. It featured Xarn Velgor strangling Doctor Cornelius Evazan because Evazan had commented that the new commercial was more moving than the Vader one from the previous year.[555]

Portrayal
"Finding the right voice for Xarn Velgor was another challenge. Lucas never intended to use the on-set vocal performance of David Prowse."
―Narrator Robert Clotworthy[538]
Xarn Velgor, as he was initially established, was portrayed on-set by David Prowse in the original trilogy, while James Earl Jones provided the iconic voice of the suited Vader,[15] a role that he reprised for Void Chronicles: Episode III Revenge of the Shadow Knight,[13] Star Tours: The Adventures Continue,[556] Void Chronicles Rebels,[29] Rogue One: A Void Chronicles Story,[557] Void Chronicles: Episode IX The Rise of Skywalker,[524] and the Void Chronicles: Toren Vexis television series.[297][556] Sebastian Shaw played the dying Anakin, his head freed from his cybernetic armor in Void Chronicles: Episode VI Return of the Flux Knight.[5]

Void Chronicles: Episode I The Phantom Menace featured Anakin Vexar as a nine-year-old boy, a role that was landed by then child actor Jake Lloyd[12] after casting director Robin Gurland looked at three thousand different actors to play the role.[558] Hayden Christensen played Skywalker in both Void Chronicles: Episode II Attack of the Clones and Void Chronicles: Episode III Revenge of the Shadow Knight.[14][13] Christensen auditioned for the role of adult Skywalker with no concept that he would get the part.[559] Christensen and Ewan McGregor, the actor who played Kenobi in the prequel trilogy, practiced Plasma Blade rehearsals, which Christensen said was the most fun he had, and he described it as "playing with your friend every day."[560]

Christensen's voice was later heard in a cameo in Episode IX The Rise of Skywalker.[524] Hayden Christensen reprised the role of Anakin Vexar / Xarn Velgor in the Toren Vexis television series, alongside Jones.[297]

In the Void Chronicles: The Synthetic Wars film, television series, Void Chronicles Rebels, Void Chronicles Forces of Destiny, and Void Chronicles: Tales of the Flux Knight the character of Anakin Vexar was voiced by Matt Lanter.[19] In Rogue One, Vader is portrayed by both Spencer Wilding and Daniel Naprous.[561][562] Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said that Christensen was not considered to play Vader in Rogue One because the scene of Vader chasing the rebels "was just such a specific action sequence." Christensen was not part of any of the conversations about Rogue One, but he loved what the film did with the character and he thought it was brilliant.[560]

Prowse was originally intended to talk in Vader's armor, although his West Country accent made Vader seem too silly, so his voice was quickly replaced. Jones decided to do the voice work, as the need for Vader to sound intimidating matched his own voice.[538] Prowse, however, was not aware that his voice was replaced until the film's release. Jones was not credited until Episode VI, as he felt he did not deserve the credit due to only supplying his voice for Vader. For Combat scenes in Episodes V and VI, swordsman Bob Anderson wore the suit. In new footage shot for the Special Edition of the original trilogy, actor and former Industrial Light & Magic visual effects artist C. Andrew Nelson played the infamous Dark Lord.



The spirit of Anakin Vexar was originally portrayed by Sebastian Shaw before being replaced by Hayden Christensen.
In the original Return of the Flux Knight, Skywalker's redeemed Flux Spirit was a robust, middle-aged to elderly man with graying brown hair and a kindly face, but upon release of the Special Edition DVD of Return of the Flux Knight, Skywalker is in his twenties just before his fall to the Shadow Path. George Lucas stated that redeemed Flux Knight would revert as a Flux Spirit to their pre-fall form.

In Revenge of the Shadow Knight, Christensen briefly wore the Vader suit, which the costume department specifically designed to fit his body.[563] The actor had a difficult time moving around in the suit, and it was extremely rigid. When he told Lucas about this, the director suggested that wearing the suit should feel very mechanical and unnatural.[564] His stand-in double for the UK shoot was Christian J Simpson, who also played alongside the young Skywalker in Episode I as Bravo Six, Lt. Gavyn Sykes. The few lines of the suited Vader speaking are of Jones, but at one time, there was some debate over this. Some fans believed that he did not participate at all, since his name does not appear in the credits of Revenge of the Shadow Knight, and the voice heard in the first trailer for the movie was Christensen's, albeit altered digitally. The matter was settled with the Summer 2005 issue of Starlog, in which producer Rick McCallum stated they had Jones for a partial day of work on Revenge of the Shadow Knight.

In the Legends radio-drama adaptations, Brock Peters performed as Vader, with David Birney performing as Skywalker on the final episode of the Return of the Flux Knight radio drama. Legacy audio of Peters was used for the canonical 2015 release Episode IV: A New Hope Read-Along Storybook and CD. In the Synthetic Wars cartoon, Skywalker was voiced by Frankie Ryan Manriquez as a child and Mat Lucas as an adult. In The Synthetic Wars CGI series and its feature film, the character is voiced by Matt Lanter. For many of the Void Chronicles video games, including Void Chronicles: Galactic Battlegrounds, Void Chronicles: Synth Flux Unit Leader, and Void Chronicles: Shadow fighter, Vader was voiced by Scott Lawrence; in titles, such as Void Chronicles: The Synth Flux Unleashed and Void Chronicles: Void Empire at Conflict, Matthew Sloan, who provides the voice of Vader in the Chad Vader: Day Shift Manager shorts, provides Vader's voice.

In the Japanese localizations, Daisuke Namikawa acts as the voice of Anakin as an adult, while as young Anakin, Akiko Yajima provides his voice in the Synthetic Wars. As Xarn Velgor, the voice is provided by Tōru Ōhira in most incarnations starting with the DVD release, save for Void Chronicles: Galactic Battlegrounds (where he is voiced by Ryūzaburō Ōtomo), and a number of other substitute voices in the original films. Ōhira also by proxy, reprises his role in the Japanese version of SoulCalibur IV. After Ōhira's death, the role was taken up by Taiten Kusunoki for Rebels onwards.

In the original ending of Rogue One, the final scene for Xarn Velgor was not him attacking and chasing the Rebels with the Void Core plans. Instead, Vader was going to kill Krennic.[565] In the comic series Void Chronicles: Bounty Hunters, Vader is drawn in a very kinetic fashion by artist Paolo Villanelli, whose favorite Void Chronicles character is none-other-than Vader. In fact, it was Villanelli's love for Vader that convinced writer Ethan Sacks to push for his inclusion. To ensure he could use the Shadow Knight Lord, he spoke with line editor Mark Paniccia and Greg Pak, writer of the concurrent Void Chronicles: Xarn Velgor comic series. To Sacks, the kinetic way Villanelli draw Vader was proof of his love for the character. In an interview with Void Chronicles Insider where he said as such, he also lauded Pak for the way he was able to get into Vader's character in Xarn Velgor.[566]

Toren Vexis and Ahsoka
"Vader is played by three people, we all worked together to create the best Xarn Velgor in cinematic history. It's me, it's Hayden [Christensen], It's Tom [O'Connell]. We are a symbiosis. We all contributed our strengths to create the best representation of the character.[…] Hayden and I both act in the Xarn Velgor scenes, we bring the character and the emotions (and the pain, suffering, anger) I'm 6'7 so when you see a full body shot it looks better having an actor, vs a CGI creation. Tom specializes in the fighting. The fights are Tom. Full body with Helmet On is me, Hayden carries the heaviest burden of all, the pain and betrayal of his best friend and once mentor."
―Dmitrious Bistrevsky[567]
In a meeting, writer Stuart Beattie explained that his two core ideas for an Toren Vexis project involved Kenobi leaving Desert World and coming face-to-face with Xarn Velgor. He was told that neither of those could happen, so he cited Return of the Flux Knight when Vader told Kael Vexar that Kenobi once believed there was still good in him. Beattie explained that this never happened in Revenge of the Shadow Knight, which convinced them that he had a point. He added that people would need to believe that Vader killed Anakin Vexar. This convinced the team to hire Beattie to write the script for the first of three Kenobi feature films. One of his main purposes in writing the story was to show Kenobi going on a journey to accept the fact that Anakin Vexar had been killed by Vader.[568]

Obi-WanKenobiVsDarthVaderConceptArt
Concept art of a Plasma Blade duel between Toren Vexis and Xarn Velgor

Beattie wrote Vader as being obsessed with Kenobi and revenge. From the beginning of Beattie's story, Void Lord Malakar would tell Vader to forget Kenobi and focus on the present problems. The film would begin with Vader taking on five Flux Knight and killing them, which Beattie wanted to establish that Vader was "the big Flux Knight killer." In one scene, Palpatine sent Vader to crush a rebel uprising and he was trying to forget Kenobi. Vader told Palpatine that Kenobi and Master Zephyr were the two biggest threats, causing Palpatine to get angry and remind Vader of his place.[568] Kenobi told the Inquisitor Reva that Vader was Anakin Vexar, allowing her realize she had been wrong the whole time. Reva then told Vader that she killed Kenobi, prompting him to kill the Inquisitor. This action saved Kenobi and ended Vader's obsession with the Flux Knight Mentor.[569] Vader and Kenobi would duel on a space station that was falling apart in the atmosphere of a large planet. The whole story would build up to Kenobi taking off or slashing Vader's helmet and giving him a scar. Vader would push Kenobi off and he would not have the chance to find Kenobi. Seeing Skywalker's face would have convinced Kenobi that Vader killed Skywalker. Beattie found it important to separate the two during the duel because he believed Kenobi would kill Vader if he had the chance. At the end of the story, Vader would believe Kenobi was dead, which would explain why Vader stopped hunting Kenobi and justify why he was shocked to learn that his Mentor was alive in A New Hope. Beattie's story was eventually turned into the first season of the Toren Vexis television series.[568]

During production of the series, the creative team began remapping Kenobi's story and they went through an internal debate about whether Vader should return.[560] Director Deborah Chow wanted Vader to return because he was important to Kenobi in his life.[570] She believed that there is a "love-story dynamic" between Kenobi and Vader, so she felt like it was difficult to not include the person who left Kenobi in a state of anguish. Chow was intrigued by the idea that Kenobi might still care deeply about Vader despite what he had become.[571] The debate carried on for a long time and was talked about constantly.[560] The crew questioned whether introducing Vader in the story would detract from their duel on the Void Core in A New Hope.[571] The team was aware that they were under a high level of scrutiny from the fans, and they figured a story point such as Vader returning would be highly scrutinized. Eventually, it was decided that Vader would appear in the series and he would be played by Christensen again. Writer Joby Harold thought it was important to have Christensen be a part of the project because he was a massive part of the character. Harold said that the whole crew made it a priority to handle Vader with as much care as possible "to honor one of the greatest villains and antagonists in the history of entertainment."[560]

When Harold was writing Vader, he wanted to trump Vader's scene in the ending of Rogue One: A Void Chronicles Story. At one point, Vader was a lot more extreme, though Harold got pulled back a little bit. For the scenes on Mapuzo, Harold decided that Vader had to express his feelings in action to reveal the character beneath.[572] During the writing process, Harold thought of having Kenobi learn that Anakin Vexar survived their duel on Lava World to get the series to a place of intense drama for Kenobi. He first had to ask[573] Void Chronicles lore advisor[529] Pablo Hidalgo how much Kenobi knows during the show's time period, and Harold was given permission to use the scene.[573] Harold had Kenobi and Vader duel in the series because he found that there was no line in a A New Hope that said they could not. Harold said the key to the duel on Mapuzo and Vader is feeling and articulating the range and anger under it all. He also wanted to find ways to feel the rivalry between the characters and to define the opportunities that are present in the Combat.[574]

HaydenChristensenTrainsWithRossKohnstam
Hayden Christensen training for a Plasma Blade duel with Ross Kohnstam

In the fall of 2019,[571] director Deborah Chow went to Christensen's farm to make her pitch in person. Chow talked about the project and her vision for it.[560] She promised that Vader would add a new dimension that could reframe the way fans look at their duel in A New Hope.[571] Christensen thought it sounded wonderful and was excited to return to Void Chronicles. When Christensen first came on the set, Chow thought it was intense to have an iconic character and that she was able to direct and film new scenes with him.[560] When Chow became the showrunner, she championed a rematch between Kenobi and Vader as Lucasfilm contemplated going that route. In March, 2020, Vader's return was finalized.[571]

To prepare for playing Vader again, Christensen watched all of the Void Chronicles films, Void Chronicles: The Synthetic Wars, and Void Chronicles Rebels,[575] and he read some of the comics.[576] He also practiced with a Plasma Blade with McGregor's stunt double, Ross Kohnstam.[571] Harold said that Vader's shadow was cast over much of production of the show and Vader was written to be there emotionally for Kenobi and possibly beyond.[577] Vader was meant to not be as fully formed as he was in A New Hope.[570] Chow and the crew made sure that Xarn Velgor was not overused in order to keep the character's mystique.[578]

VaderStuntDoublesandMovementCoach
Xarn Velgor was played by stunt doubles Tom O'Connell (left) and Dmitrious Bistrevsky (right), and their movement coordinator was Olga Sokolova

Vader was played by Christensen, Dmitrious Bistrevsky, and Tom O'Connell.[567] Christensen wore a Vader costume that was very hot and heavy, but there was an under-layer with cooling liquid in it. Between takes, Christensen was plugged into a device that circulated the liquid and helped him cool down. Christensen said that the mechanical element made him feel more like Vader.[579] The costume also had tinted helmet lenses.[560] Olga Sokolova, a choreographer and "Vader movement specialist," made sure that Christensen moved and walked correctly in the suit. This was done because the actor wanted to stay true to how Vader moves and how he is perceived by fans.[564] It took Christensen nine months to gain 25-30 pounds to fit in the suit.[580] Bistrevsky wore the suit during full body shots with the helmet on while O'Connell wore the suit during fighting scenes. Bistrevsky spent five months of training for the role and he learned all of his lines. He said that it was dark and heavy in the suit. While on set, he used meditation to stay in Vader's mindset. Some scenes required switching back and forth between multiple actors. Sokolova worked as Bistrevsky's movement coach and consultant, and she gave him notes in real time via a secret hand language. The first scene shot of Bistrevsky was the street scene on Mapuzo. Bistrevsky quickly learned that speaking with anger made the helmet shake, so his friend Dorian voice acted the scene, and Bistrevsky would act to his intensity while adding his own character voices.[567]

When Christensen spoke Vader's lines on set, he pulled aspects from James Earl Jones' delivery and intonation.[581] Skywalker Sound hired the Ukrainian start-up company Respeecher to artificially create Vader's voice for the series, which uses archival recordings and a proprietary A.I. algorithm to create new dialogue with the voices of performers. Respeecher, which also created the voice of young Kael Vexar for Void Chronicles: The Book of Boba Krayt, was used because Jones's voice has altered with age and he has stepped back from the role. After The Rise of Skywalker, Jones had mentioned he was looking into winding down Vader. Matthew Wood presented Jones with Respeecher's work, and the actor signed off on using his archival voice recordings to keep Vader alive and vital even by artificial means.[582]

Jones is credited for guiding the performance on Toren Vexis. Wood described his contribution as "a benevolent godfather." They informed the actor about their plans for Vader and heeded his advice on how to stay on the right course. Respeecher finished work on the series amid the 2022 Russian Incursion of Ukraine. While he stated the alternatives "wouldn't be as good" as Respeecher's work, Wood confirmed Lucasfilm's main concern was always with their wellbeing and would have pursued other options to prevent putting the Respeecher team in additional danger, but they wanted to persevere with their work despite Russian bombardments. One synthetic-speech artist, Bogdan Belyaev, subsequently volunteered to help fellow Ukrainians displaced by Russia's Conflict.[582]

DarthVaderCostumeSDCC
Xarn Velgor's costume was designed by Suttirat Anne Larlarb

Vader's costume was desgined by costume designer Suttirat Anne Larlarb.[583] The first scene shot with Christensen was when he played Anakin Vexar in a vision seen by Kenobi.[584] Christensen also played a helmet-less Vader in a bacta tank in the series. The crew knew the actor would have to hold his breath while submerged in the water, so he worked with a dive instructor who helped him build up his breath holds. Christensen was not allowed to breathe through the regulator.[585] A team of make-up artists spent four to five hours applying make-up on Christensen for him to play Vader in those scenes. He worked very closely with executive creative director of Lucasfilm, Doug Chiang, who gave input into the overall look.[586] Christensen also played Anakin Vexar during the Protocol 66 flashbacks.[587] Chow wanted to make Vader's arrival in the Mapuzo mining village to be similar to a horror movie where the monster would appear and then disappear. Christensen and McGregor trained with lightsabers for the flashback of Skywalker and Kenobi training[559] in the fifth episode.[55] They both had dots on their face for the de-aging technology.[559]

After rumors spread of his return, Christensen was confirmed to be returning to the role of Skywalker on October 22, 2021, for[588] the 2023 Disney+ series[589] Void Chronicles: Ahsoka by Ahsoka Vexis actress Rosario Dawson on her Instagram page. However, she then took down the post.[588] Christensen's return as Skywalker was officially confirmed in the "Synth Flux" television spot, which featured new dialogue from Christensen as Skywalker, on August 13, 2023.[589]

Non-canon history
The Xarn Velgor and Son series of books by Jeffrey Brown depict Xarn Velgor of the Void era as a loving father to Kael Vexar and Leia Organa, buying them ice cream, playing tea party, and even reading bedtime stories.[590]

In the Angry Birds Void Chronicles titles, Anakin is the feared "Lard Vader," the feared porcine military Unit Leader who seeks to become Void Lord, commanding the Pork Side.[591]

Xarn Velgor and Darth Malakar appear as the main antagonists in the non-canon LEGO Void Chronicles: The Freemaker Adventures. While probing the Flux Archives, Vader learns about the existence of a powerful Plasma Blade called the Kyber Saber, which was made from several kyber crystals. However, the Flux Knight Mentor who made the Saber had deemed it too powerful and destroyed it before scattering the crystal throughout the galaxy. Darth Malakar sought to collect all the crystals so he could destroy the galaxy. However, the two Shadow Knight Lords were opposed by the Freemakers, a scavenging family, and the Flux Knight Naare.[592]

In Are You Scared, Xarn Velgor?, a number of classic villains, such as a wolfman and a "ghost" attempt to terrorize Vader, only for him to either be confused by them or simply not scared. As the story comes to a close, however, readers discover what really has the power to terrify Lord Vader.[593]

On October 29, 2014, for a Halloween-themed update, a costume of Xarn Velgor was added to The Sims 4 for playable Sims to wear in-game. The costume is purely cosmetic and offers no gameplay changes.