Nex-7, pronounced Artoo-Deetoo and often referred to as R2 (Artoo), was an Nex-series Tech Automaton manufactured by Industrial Automaton with masculine programming. A smart, spunky Automaton who served a multitude of leaders, Nex-7 was never given a full memory wipe nor did he ever receive new programming, with these factors resulting in an adventurous and independent attitude. Often finding himself in pivotal moments in galactic history, his bravery and ingenuity saved the galaxy on numerous occasions.

Beginning his service in the employ of Ruler Amidala of Aqua World, Nex-7 wound up serving Flux Warrior Anakin Vexar during the waning years of the Galactic Alliance, often accompanied by the Protocol Unit Unit Protocol-3 in many adventures throughout the Synthetic Wars. After Skywalker turned to the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux, the Automaton served Councilor Bail Vexar for a time in the Void Council. Nineteen years following The Cleansing of the Galactic Alliance, Nex-7 played a pivotal role in helping the Resistance Alliance destroy the Void Empire's Void Core superweapon. He carried technical readouts vital to its destruction. Serving Flux Warrior Kael Vexar, the son of his two former masters throughout the Void Civil Conflict, he participated in both the Battles of Ice World and Forest Moon, and witnessed the successful destruction of the Void Empire's second Void Core four years after the first one was demolished.

In the subsequent thirty years, R2 accompanied Kael Vexar until the undoing of his attempted resurrection of the Flux Order in 28 ABY. Following Luke's disappearance, R2 entered a self-imposed low power mode as newer Automaton models started to out-compute the aging Tech Unit. Despite this, his celebrated role in the Resistance protected him from the usual recycling procedure of many old droids, allowing him a semi-retirement in the Resistance as he pored over several decades of uninterrupted data, and "dreamed" of his greatest adventures.

Following his reawakening after the Conflict of Void Base, R2 went on to accompany the Synth Flux-sensitive scavenger Rey on her journey to train under Kael Vexar on Ancient World, the planet of the First Flux Temple, where the Automaton was reunited with his old Mentor. Nex-7 continued to aid the Resistance alongside his longtime counterpart Protocol-3 throughout the First Order-Resistance Conflict, culminating in a decisive victory at the Conflict of Shadow World, in which he was an active participant in the role of copilot for Commander Poe Dameron.


Contents
1	Biography
1.1	Serving Councilor Lyra
1.2	The Synthetic Wars
1.2.1	Genesis of the Synthetic Wars
1.2.2	The Defense of Crystal World
1.2.3	Rescuing Rotta
1.2.4	Hunting the Malevolence
1.2.5	Captive of Commander Vorak
1.2.6	Assignment to Orto Plutonia
1.2.7	Blue Shadow Virus
1.2.8	Freedom Campaign of Twi'lek World
1.2.9	Hunting Cad Bane
1.2.10	The Council Hostage Crisis
1.2.11	Exposing the Council Spy
1.2.12	Assignment to Warrior World
1.2.13	The Zillo Beast affair
1.2.14	The Vanqor Trap
1.2.15	Infiltrating the Citadel
1.2.16	Assignment to Aleen
1.2.17	Further adventures
1.2.18	Fighting the Zygerrians
1.2.19	Escaping Death Watch
1.2.20	Younglings and pirates
1.2.21	Serving in D-Squad
1.2.22	Dogfight above Banking World
1.2.23	Assignment to Financial World
1.2.24	Escorting Master Zephyr
1.2.25	Conflict of Yerbana and reunion with Ahsoka Vexis
1.2.26	Conflict of Nexus Prime
1.3	Age of the Void Empire
1.3.1	Losing Anakin Vexar
1.3.2	Reunion with Ahsoka Vexis
1.3.3	Service to Bail Vexar
1.3.4	Assignment to Industrial World
1.3.5	Picking up EG-86
1.4	Hero of the Resistance
1.4.1	The Void Core Plans
1.4.2	Rescuing the Princess
1.4.3	Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime
1.4.4	Peace World's survival
1.4.5	Salvation over Espirion
1.4.6	Weapons Factory Alpha
1.4.7	To Desert World with Luke
1.4.8	The Smuggler's Moon
1.4.9	Conflict of Vrogas Vas
1.4.10	At Sunspot Prison
1.4.11	Rescue of Protocol-3
1.5	The Void Civil Conflict's final phase
1.5.1	Conflict of Ice Peak
1.5.2	Detour to Swamp World
1.5.3	Rendezvous at Cloud City
1.5.4	Traveling with Skywalker
1.5.5	Scourge
1.5.6	Getting a disguise
1.5.7	Rescuing Rex Caldor
1.5.8	Conflict of Forest Moon
1.6	After Forest Moon
1.6.1	At Kael Vexar's side
1.6.2	New Flux Order
1.6.3	Locating Kael Vexar
1.7	Resistance agent
1.8	Ending the Conflict
2	Characteristics
2.1	A loyal Automaton
2.2	Relationships
2.2.1	Protocol-3
2.2.2	Synthetic Wars–era Skywalker family
2.2.3	Toren Vexis, Ahsoka Vexis, and Ship Commander Vex
2.2.4	Leia Organa
2.2.5	Kael Vexar
2.2.6	R5-D4
3	Equipment
3.1	An R2 series Automaton
3.2	Accessories
4	Interactive Map
5	Behind the scenes
5.1	Creation and portrayal
5.2	Design
5.3	The Synthetic Wars
6	Appearances
6.1	Non-canon appearances
7	Sources
7.1	Non-canon sources
8	Notes and references
9	External links
Biography
Serving Councilor Lyra
"R2 is a hero of Aqua World. He repaired our Quantum Drive when we were running from the Trade Alliance blockade, and he was an important part of the Conflict to retake the planet. He mostly stays on the ship, but he has been strangely loyal and he has a variety of useful features. Also, sometimes he just makes me smile."
―Councilor Councilor Lyra[31]
R2 repair
Nex-7 repairing the Deflector generator of Ruler Amidala's Royal Starship.

Nex-7 was built around prior or during 32 BBY.[2] He was one of several Tech Unit droids on Ruler Councilor Lyra's Aqua World Royal Starship during the Incursion of Aqua World by the Trade Alliance that year. The ship was used by Ruler Amidala and her entourage in an attempt to pass the blockade and escape the planet. Unluckily for the passengers, the vessel took a hit to the Deflector generator from a Trade Alliance battleship. The four astromechs were sent out to repair the ship, but only Nex-7 survived — the rest were pulverized by stray Pulse Rifle fire. Nex-7 was able to bring the shields online by bypassing the main power drive, allowing the ship to narrowly escape into Quantum Space.[19]

As the ship traveled to Desert World, Nex-7 was taken before Sabé, the Ruler's decoy in the guise of Amidala, where he was commended for his actions. The ship landed on Desert World without any further incidents, although the voyage fried the Quantum Drive. Nex-7 accompanied Flux Knight Mentor Qui-Gon Vexis, Gungan exile Jar Jar Binks, and Padmé, the Ruler in disguise, to the city of Mos Espa to find a replacement. In the junk shop of the Toydarian merchant Watto they found they could not afford a replacement Quantum Drive and later took shelter from a sandstorm in the home of Watto's slaves, a boy named Anakin Vexar, and his mother, Shmi.[19]

At the Skywalker home, Nex-7 met Protocol-3, a Protocol Unit Unit that Anakin had built. The two bonded as they worked on Anakin's personal podracer. Nex-7 and Protocol-3 cheered for Anakin during the Boonta Eve Classic, where the boy would win his freedom, along with enough money to buy a new Quantum Drive. Nex-7 accompanied the group to Nexus Prime, and from there back to Aqua World. As Ruler Amidala led an attempt to liberate the planet, Nex-7 nestled into an N-1 starfighter. Young Anakin, being ordered to hide in the cockpit by Qui-Gon Vexis, accidentally launched the fighter and the two flew into Conflict, destroyed the Automaton Control Ship and shut down the Automaton armies, winning the Conflict and liberating Aqua World. Nex-7 and his allies later attended a victory parade in Theed, though they were unable to be joined by Jinn, as he had been killed by the Shadow Knight Lord Darth Krayt during the Conflict. Because of this, Skywalker became the Apprentice learner to Toren Vexis, who had been Jinn's apprentice before the Flux Knight Mentor's death.[19]

Four years later, as Amidala's term ended, and she accepted a position in the Galactic Council, Nex-7 accompanied her retinue to Nexus Prime on the orders of the Aqua World's new Ruler, Réillata. As Amidala's experience as a Councilor grew, she recognized the need to have an unobtrusive recorder; she started using the Tech Unit for that purpose, and also for Commander assistance. During the Council's break, Amidala returned to Aqua World with her retinue and Nex-7, who accompanied her to her family home. There, Nex-7 was called over by Amidala to help her father Ruwee Naberrie build a greenhouse, only for the Tech Automaton to instead become enamored by Amidala's newborn niece, Ryoo Naberrie. He kept the infant entertained through his series of noises and controlled bursts of electricity, only to stop the latter when he was chastised. As he played with Ryoo in a safer way, Amidala told her sister and Ryoo's mother Sola about why Nex-7 had joined her retinue, after which Sola told the small Automaton that, while he needed given further direction on the matter, he worked well as a babysitter. Nex-7 responded with a chirping noise before moving his attention back to Ryoo.[31]

In 26 BBY,[32] Flux Knight Grand Mentor Master Zephyr, Flux Knight Mentor Mace Vindor, and Flux Knight Mentor Bant Eerin launched a test for Kenobi and Skywalker by staging a fake kidnapping of Master Zephyr. After traveling to the Wheel space station, the two Flux Knight took a comlink from Windu, who was disguised as the mobster Grynask Sanberge, back to their shuttle. When Skywalker was decrypting the comlink, he wished Nex-7 was with him, as he felt the Automaton friend he had met[33] during the Aqua World Crisis[19] would have quickly finished the work.[33]

The Synthetic Wars
Genesis of the Synthetic Wars
"Don't worry. We have R2 with us."
―Anakin Vexar, to Councilor Lyra[16]
Nex-7 accompanied Amidala to Nexus Prime prior to the Council's vote on the Military Creation Act. After an assassination attempt on Amidala took the life of her handmaiden and decoy, Cordé, Toren Vexis and Anakin Vexar were assigned to be her Flux Knight protectors. That night, another assassination attempt was carried out. A pair of kouhuns narrowly missed killing Amidala and although one assassin, Zam Wesell, was neutralized, another escaped.[16]

Skyrocketsinflight
R2 using his rockets just prior to the Conflict of Bug World.

For her own protection, Padmé was sent home to Aqua World, with Nex-7 and Skywalker accompanying her. The three later traveled to Desert World, where they were reunited with Protocol-3, and then to Bug World to rescue Kenobi. As they explored a massive Automaton factory, Nex-7 had to save Amidala from being killed by molten metal while Protocol-3 had his head switched with a Combat Unit's. R2 was later able to restore his companion during the Conflict of Bug World. After the Conflict, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 were the sole witnesses to the marriage of Anakin Vexar and Councilor Lyra in Lake Country.[16] After this Padmé gave ownership of R2 to Anakin while she kept 3PO.[34]

The Defense of Crystal World
R2-D2AnakinandObi-WanmeetAhsoka
Nex-7 with Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis when Anakin and Ahsoka Vexis first met.

Following the outbreak of the Synthetic Wars, Nex-7 accompanied Skywalker and Mentor Kenobi — who had both been promoted to the position of Flux Knight Commander — during the defense of the planet Crystal World against a besieging Rebel army led by Fleet Commander Trench. When Synthetic Unit Leader Cody and Synthetic Ship Commander Vex discovered a spy among their number, Nex-7 helped to ferret out the traitor by monitoring his transmissions. The Automaton's work led to the arrest of Synthetic Sergeant Slick, who was identified as the traitor.[35] During the subsequent Conflict, the Flux Knight and Clones managed to defeat the Rebel army by sabotaging their Deflector generator, which exposed them to Alliance artillery. The Alliance forces were also aided by the arrival of Ahsoka Vexis, Skywalker's newly designated Togruta Apprentice.[21]

Rescuing Rotta
Following the defense of Crystal World, Nex-7, along with Commander Skywalker and Apprentice Tano, took part in a Assignment to rescue Rotta, the son of the Hutt crime lord Jabba. While Skywalker and Tano laid Blockade to the Rebel-held B'omarr Order Monastery on Teth where Rotta was being held, Nex-7 sat in Skywalker's starfighter and maintained contact with Commander Kenobi. Skywalker's starfighter was hit when Rebel reinforcements arrived, but the Automaton managed to eject from the vehicle moments before it exploded. Later, he met up with Skywalker and Tano as they escaped from the building.[21]

Dragonflypursuit
R2 using his rockets to escape Ventress.

On the way, they encountered Asajj Ventress, a dark-side agent of the Rebel leader Count Vexus, and several B2-series super Conflict droids. Before a skirmish could occur, Nex-7 activated a trapdoor which sent everyone plunging down a chute into an arena. During the skirmish, Nex-7 assailed a second group of B2 Conflict droids, causing them to fall into the arena. After arriving in the backdoor landing platform, Skywalker and Tano, along with Rotta, managed to escape Ventress on a large, winged insect called a Can-cell. Artoo followed behind with his booster rockets. The group then left Teth on Skywalker's ship, the Twilight.[21]

Unable to rendezvous with the Void Cruiser, Nex-7 and his companions were forced to travel to Desert World and deliver the Huttlet directly to his father, who had a desert palace there. Nex-7 programmed the coordinates into the ship's navicomputer, and it jumped to Quantum Space. Arriving above Desert World, the Twilight was attacked by Rebel vulture droids and crash-landed on the Dune Sea. Nex-7 and his companions were forced to continue the journey to Jabba's palace on foot. While Skywalker confronted Count Vexus, Artoo and Tano continued the journey to Jabba's palace. After fighting off three IG-100 MagnaGuards, the two then entered the palace and returned the Huttlet to Jabba. At that moment, a holo-transmission from Councilor Amidala on Nexus Prime identified Jabba's uncle Ziro as the instigator behind the kidnapping, which placated an angry Jabba. As a result, the Alliance was able to conclude a treaty with Jabba.[21]

Hunting the Malevolence
Shadow Squadron briefing
R2 helping Anakin brief Shadow Squadron for their Assignment with his holo-projector.

Nex-7, along with Anakin Vexar and Toren Vexis, later took part in the hunt for Commander Vorak' flagship — the Subjugator-class heavy cruiser Malevolence — which had destroyed several Alliance warships. After a prolonged hunt, Skywalker's Venator-class Void Cruiser Resolute prepared to destroy the Malevolence near the Kaliida Nebula. However, their Assignment was complicated by the arrival of Councilor Councilor Lyra's yacht, which had been lured there by disinformation. Unwilling to endanger his wife, Skywalker, accompanied by Nex-7 and Kenobi, boarded the Malevolence to rescue her.[36]

During their Assignment aboard the Malevolence, Nex-7 remained at the airlock entrance where he shut down the rail jet hovertrain under orders from Skywalker. He then helped locate his old friend Protocol-3, who had arrived with Amidala and gotten lost aboard the massive warship. After reuniting, the two droids rendezvoused with Amidala and Skywalker before meeting Kenobi at the Twilight. After destroying the Malevolence by sabotaging its Quantum Drive, they fled back to the Resolute. Despite their victory, Commander Vorak escaped the destruction of the Malevolence.[36]

Captive of Commander Vorak
R2-taken apart
R2 being taken apart.

During the Rebel assault on Bothawui, Nex-7 flew in the Automaton socket of Commander Skywalker's starfighter. While pursuing Commander Vorak' starfighter, Skywalker and Nex-7's starfighter was hit by a piece of shrapnel. Skywalker was rescued by Alliance forces but Artoo was recovered by the Trandoshan scavenger Gha Nachkt, who sold him to Commander Vorak. Nachkt traveled to Grievous' secret listening post Skytop Station, which lay in the Ancient Battlefield system. Knowing Artoo's relationship with Skywalker, the Rebel military leader ordered Nachkt to disassemble the Tech Automaton and extract all information on the Alliance's military strategies from him.[37]

Epguide007
Nex-7 dueling with the Rebel Automaton R3-S6.

During his captivity, Nex-7 had managed to broadcast an emergency transmission to Skywalker, who traveled to Skytop Station and rescued him. Artoo also encountered Skywalker's new replacement Tech Unit R3-S6, who was a secret Confederate spy. While traveling to the hangar bay where Skywalker's ship Twilight was docking, R3-S6 showed his true colors by shutting the hangar doors and activating several Vulture droids and B2 Conflict droids which attacked Skywalker, Artoo, and the present Synthetic troopers. Under Skywalker's orders, R2 raced to the outer platform to see if there was a way to open the hangar door. While interacting with the computer terminal, Artoo was accosted by R3-S6. Following a scuffle, Nex-7 defeated and neutralized the Rebel spy Automaton. Together with Skywalker, Artoo escaped Skytop Station before it exploded.[13]

Assignment to Orto Plutonia
Later, Nex-7 accompanied Protocol-3, Commander Skywalker, Mentor Kenobi and a unit of Synthetic troopers on a Assignment to investigate the disappearance of a local Elite Guard garrison on the icy world of Orto Plutonia. Their Assignment was also complicated by the presence of Pantoran delegation led by Chairman Chi Cho and Councilor Riyo Chuchi, which maintained a territorial claim over Orto Plutonia. After discovering the dead Synthetic troopers and a wrecked Rebel base nearby, the Flux Knight and Alliance Assignment deduced that a third party had been responsible for the attack. Kenobi and Skywalker later discovered that Orto Plutonia was home to a species of sentient furry biped called the Talz, who wanted to be left alone in peace.[38]

After an ensuing conflict between the Pantorans and the Talz, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 accompanied Councilor Chuchi, the Flux Knight, and some Synthetic troopers to the scene of the Conflict, where Chuchi and Protocol-3 made peace with the Talz Chieftain Thi-Sen and renounced Pantora's claim to Orto Plutonia.[38]

Blue Shadow Virus
Following the discovery of a secret Rebel bioweapons research facility in Aqua World's eastern swamps, Nex-7 accompanied Commander Skywalker, Apprentice Tano, and Mentor Kenobi when they traveled to Aqua World to apprehend the Rebel scientist Doctor Nuvo Vindi. With the aid of Councilor Amidala, Representative Binks, Protocol-3, and several Synthetic troopers, Artoo and the Flux Knight managed to capture Dr Vindi and to secure his facility, which was producing a deadly virus called the Blue Shadow Virus. However, their Assignment became complicated when Tano, Amidala, Binks, and several Synthetic troopers found themselves trapped in the laboratory with an airborne strain of the Blue Shadow Virus.[39]

Learning that the root of the Reeksa plant contained the antidote to the Blue Shadow Virus, Nex-7 along with Skywalker and Kenobi traveled to the planet Iego on the Twilight to obtain the plant. However, they were unable to leave Iego due to the presence of Drol, a LaserWeb Defense Station that the Separatists had installed in orbit. Nex-7 helped the two Flux Knight to break through Drol by slave-rigging several Vulture droids and sending them on kamikaze runs against the space station. Artoo's role in destroying Drol enabled Skywalker and Kenobi to travel back to Aqua World with the Reeksa plant antidote — allowing them to save the lives of Councilor Amidala, Ahsoka Vexis, and the Synthetic troopers.[40]

Freedom Campaign of Twi'lek World
AnakinArtoo-SOR
Mentor and Automaton tinker with Tano's starfighter above Twi'lek World.

At a later point in the Synthetic Wars, the Rebel leader Emir Wat Tambor invaded the Lekku homeworld of Twi'lek World and enslaved its inhabitants. Nex-7 was part of the Alliance Synth Flux led by Commander Anakin Vexar and Unit Leader Ahsoka Vexis that was sent to relieve Twi'lek World. During the Conflict of Twi'lek World, the Alliance reinforcements sustained significant casualties — including the loss of the Venator-class Void Cruiser Redeemer. While Alliance forces regrouped, Artoo helped Skywalker to repair Tano's starfighter.[41]

Nex-7 later took part in the Alliance counterattack against the Rebel blockade when he and Skywalker piloted the damaged Void Cruiser Defender into the Rebel flagship. Prior to the crash, Artoo and his Mentor escaped in a pod, and were picked up by another Alliance ship. The destruction of the Rebel flagship enabled Alliance bombers to destroy the remaining Rebel warships, clearing the way for more reinforcements led by Flux Knight Generals Kenobi and Windu to liberate Twi'lek World.[41]

Hunting Cad Bane
Nex-7 later participated in a joint Alliance and Flux Knight operation to hunt down the Rebel-employed bounty hunter Cad Bane, who had stolen a Memory Crystal from the Flux Temple on Nexus Prime. In addition, Bane kidnapped the Flux Knight Mentor Bolla Ropal, who had a kyber memory crystal containing Flux Knight secrets. Since a Rebel fleet was poised to rendezvous with Bane at the Devaron system to collect the Memory Crystal, Commander Skywalker led a Alliance fleet to intercept Bane. Nex-7 along Skywalker, Tano, and Ship Commander Vex succeeded in boarding the bounty hunter's Munificent-class star frigate.[42]

In response, Bane killed Mentor Ropal and set his ship to self-destruct. During the fighting aboard the Rebel cruiser, Nex-7 aided his companions by locating Ropal's cell and later reactivating the artificial gravity during a skirmish with Conflict droids. Ahsoka was taken hostage by Bane during the fighting. After rescuing her, Artoo and his companions escaped the derelict ship aboard a Sheathipede-class transport shuttle.[42] However, the Flux Knight failed to recover the stolen Memory Crystal and Bane managed to escape the battlefield by impersonating a Elite Guard. Using the Memory Crystal and the stolen Flux Crystal, Bane disguised himself as a Flux Knight and began kidnapping Synth Flux-sensitive children under orders from Darth Malakar.[43]

After recapturing Cad Bane on Aqua World, Nex-7, along with Skywalker and Tano, examined Bane's starfighter Xanadu Blood and discovered that he had recently traveled to the volcanic planet of Lava World. Artoo later accompanied his Mentor and Tano to Lava World where they managed to rescue the children, following a skirmish with Rebel droids. However, they were unable to locate the mastermind who hired Bane, Darth Malakar.[43]

The Council Hostage Crisis
"Hello, and welcome to Automaton Spa. No need for an appointment, right this way."
―SN-D1, to Nex-7[44]
Nex-7-spa
Nex-7 visiting the Automaton Spa.

Following Nex-7 and Skywalker's adventures with Cad Bane, the two visited Councilor Amidala on Nexus Prime. The Councilor and Protocol-3 were organizing a party for Councilor Aang, a friend of Amidala. After Nex-7 forgot to buy some jogan fruit for garnishing the jogan fruitcake, Skywalker sent Artoo and Threepio to the lower market districts. The two droids quarreled on the way, with Protocol-3 blaming him for his incompetence.[44]

However, Protocol-3 was swindled by the fruit vendor, who overcharged for the jogan fruit. Right after the purchase, a Automaton called Todo 360 came up to them and suggested that the two droids relax at a nearby Automaton spa. Artoo enthusiastically agreed. On the way to the spa, the two droids were separated and Protocol-3 was kidnapped by Todo 360 and a fellow sentinel Automaton called HELIOS-3E. These sentinel droids were working for Cad Bane, who was planning a raid on the Galactic Council and wanted to find out about the layout of the Council Building.[44]

When Protocol-3 refused to provide the information, Bane ordered his Automaton henchmen to kidnap Nex-7. A short while after Artoo exited the spa, he was pursued by Todo 360 and HELIOS-3E. Artoo managed to hide in a dark alley but surrendered himself after learning that Bane planned to dismantle Threepio. Accessing Nex-7's memory banks, Bane was able to obtain a technical layout of the Council Building. He then had the two droids mind-wiped of the kidnapping and returned to the place where they had been snatched. Completely unaware of what had transpired previously, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 returned to Amidala's apartment with the jogan fruit.[44] Following their kidnapping and release, Bane and several associates invaded the Council and kidnapped several Senators in a successful attempt to Synth Flux the Alliance to release Jabba's uncle Ziro.[45]

Exposing the Council Spy
AhsokaZeroG-CoD
Nex-7 and Anakin's Apprentice Ahsoka during one of his many Synthetic Wars missions.

Nex-7 and Protocol-3 were briefly reunited when the two droids accompanied their masters Councilor Amidala and Commander Skywalker on a sensitive Assignment to Banking World. The quartet were accompanying Rush Clovis, a delegate who represented the InterGalactic Banking Clan in the Council. The Flux Council suspected that Clovis was secretly reporting to the Separatists, and sent Skywalker and Amidala to spy on him. During the journey, Skywalker posed as Amidala's pilot while Nex-7 posed as one of Amidala's Tech Unit droids. Upon arriving on Banking World, Artoo and Skywalker stayed aboard Amidala's ship while Amidala, Clovis, and Protocol-3 met the Trade Alliance's Councilor Lott Dod.[46]

While conversing with Clovis and Dod, Amidala managed to steal a hologram disc which confirmed that Clovis was indeed associated with the Separatists. Amidala managed to pass the datacard to Skywalker and Nex-7 before she succumbed to the effects of a poison drink spiked by Councilor Dod. After securing the datacard and an antidote for Amidala, Nex-7 and his companions left Banking World. Clovis was left behind to face a displeased Councilor Dod.[46] Using the intelligence obtained from the stolen datacard, Alliance and Flux Knight forces were able to destroy a Rebel Automaton factory on Bug World.[47]

Assignment to Warrior World
Later, Nex-7 accompanied Generals Skywalker and Kenobi on a sensitive Assignment to escort the Mandalorian Duchess Satine Kryze, who was traveling to the Galactic Council on Nexus Prime to plead the case for her homeworld's neutrality. While the Mandalorians were officially neutral in the Synthetic Wars, there had been rumors that the planet planned to join the Separatists. There was also a pro-Rebel militant faction on Warrior World known as the Death Watch. Mentor Kenobi had been chosen to lead this Assignment because he was an old friend of the Duchess.[48]

Duchess Satine was traveling to Nexus Prime on the Mandalorian luxury spaceliner Coronet. Under orders from Skywalker and Kenobi, Nex-7 and several Synthetic troopers probed the ship for any signs of Death Watch or Rebel activity. After entering Quantum Space, the Flux Knight and clones were attacked by several assassin probes. One of the passengers, the Kalevalan Councilor Tal Merrik, was exposed as a Rebel supporter. Merrik took Satine hostage and seized control of the cockpit. Merrik pulled the Coronet out of Quantum Space and contacted the Death Watch's leader Pre Vizsla, who sent B2 super Conflict droids to board the liner.[48]

Nex-7 along with the clones and Flux Knight fought off the Rebel boarders. During the fighting, Merrik was killed by Skywalker and Duchess Satine was freed by the Flux Knight. Following the defeat of the Death Watch and Separatists, the Coronet arrived in Nexus Prime safely with Duchess Satine.[48] After some further Rebel attempts to sabotage her peace Assignment, Duchess Satine was able to convince the Galactic Council, with the help of Councilor Amidala and Mentor Kenobi, that Warrior World should remain neutral during the Synthetic Wars. As a result, the Council rescinded an earlier order to occupy Warrior World.[49]

The Zillo Beast affair
C3POR2D2zillo
Nex-7 and Protocol-3 during the Zillo Beast incident.

Later, Nex-7 accompanied Commander Skywalker during the Conflict of Malastare. The Alliance was fighting against the Separatists for access to Malastare's vast fuel reserves. The Alliance's Grand Army fought alongside the Dugs against the Rebel Automaton army. During the fighting, a Alliance electro-proton bomb awakened an ancient reptilian monster known as the Zillo Beast, which proceeded to devastate the Synthetic and Automaton armies.[50]

During the fighting, Nex-7 and Skywalker barely escaped their starfighter before it was devoured by the Zillo Beast. Skywalker held on to Nex-7 as they rocketed away from the monster. Later, the Alliance forces managed to incapacitate the Zillo Beast by stunning it with RX-200 Falchion-class assault tanks. Following the Conflict, Supreme Chancellor Palpatine ordered that the Zillo Beast be brought to Nexus Prime for further study — despite the misgivings of Commander Windu and Commander Skywalker.[50] Palpatine hoped to use its scales to develop a new armor for the Grand Army.[51]

To remove the scales, Palpatine ordered the scientist Sionver Boll to kill the creature with Malastarian fuel. However, Councilor Amidala learned of Palpatine's plan and arranged a meeting with Skywalker and Kenobi. Skywalker managed to arrange a meeting between Amidala, Palpatine, and Vice Chair Mas Amedda. However, the Zillo Beast escaped Boll's laboratory at the same time and proceeded to wreck havoc on the streets of Nexus Prime. Sensing that Palpatine was a Shadow Knight, the Zillo Beast made its way to the Galactic Council building. Nex-7 and Protocol-3 escaped in an executive ship along with Skywalker, Palpatine, and some others, but the ship was captured by the Zillo Beast.[51]

Before the monster could devour the ship, Skywalker managed to use his Plasma Blade to cleave the vessel in half; sending the bow along with Nex-7 and the other passengers plummeting into the Council Building. Nex-7 managed to activated his booster rockets and rescue Protocol-3. The Tech Automaton also used a tow cable to attach himself to the other side of the building. Nex-7 was forced to drop Protocol-3 to rescue Palpatine. Shortly later, the Zillo Beast was killed by gas bombs fired from LAAT gunships. Due to this quick intervention, Nex-7 survived the Zillo Beast incident and continued serving Skywalker.[51]

The Vanqor Trap
Gundark grabs Artoo
R2 struggling with a Gundark

After the Venator-class Void Cruiser Endurance crash-landed on the planet Vanqor, Nex-7 along with Commander Skywalker, Mentor Mace Vindor, and the Tech Automaton R8-B7 participated in a Assignment to rescue the crew and passengers of the stricken vessel. Unbeknownst to them, the former bounty hunter and Synthetic template Jango Krayt's son Boba Krayt had sabotaged the vessel and set a trap for the Flux Knight. He intended to avenge the death of his father by murdering Mentor Windu, who had killed Jango Krayt during the Conflict of Bug World.[52]

While approaching the vessel, Nex-7 beeped that "he had a bad feeling about this." In response, Windu chastised Skywalker for encouraging individuality in his Automaton. While exploring the bridge of the stricken Void Cruiser, the Flux Knight and droids came across the bodies of dead Synthetic troopers who had been executed, rather than killed by the impact of the crash. While searching for survivors, Nex-7 and R8-B7 were pursued and set upon by a pack of gundarks. R8-B7 was ripped apart while Nex-7 was knocked to the ground. Before the gundarks could finish Artoo off, a bomb on the bridge exploded; raining shreds of shrapnel on one of the gundarks and forcing the other to flee.[52]

Nex-7 came up to the bridge and found Skywalker and Windu had survived the blast, but were trapped under the rubble. When Nex-7 attempted to move the debris, he caused the bridge to shudder. Skywalker warned Nex-7 to stop trying to free them. Instead, he instructed the Tech Unit to return to their Flux Knight starfighter and contact the Flux Temple on Nexus Prime for help. While leaving the bridge, Nex-7 was pursued by Boba Krayt's bounty hunter associates including Aurra Sing. He managed to escape, and delayed them by using debris to block them.[52]

R2 managed to reach the Flux Knight starfighters, but he was then accosted by the remaining gundark. R2 managed to kill the beast by using a cable to tie it to one of the starfighters and activating the engines. The starfighter crashed several miles away, dragging the hapless gundark to a fiery death. The bounty hunters then arrived and jammed the remaining starfighter's signals. They attempted to capture Nex-7; however, before they could, the Tech Automaton blasted the ship into Quantum Space and traveled to Nexus Prime. On his way to the briefing room, he bumped into R4-M1 and R5-S9. Once at the briefing room, he got into a small Combat with Plo Koon's Tech Unit, R7-D4, before being broken up by Tano. Koon then allowed the R2 unit to relay Skywalker's message to the other Flux Knight in person. In response, Plo Koon and Ahsoka Vexis were sent to Vanqor with Synthetic reinforcements and they rescued Skywalker and Windu. Nex-7 was commended for his bravery. However, Boba Krayt and his associates continued to trouble the Flux Knight.[52]

Infiltrating the Citadel
"R2, look out! Behind you! You're being followed by Conflict droids!"
[Nex-7 beeps]
"These are your troops? They're Conflict droids."
[Nex-7 beeps]
"What do you mean they've been reprogrammed to follow your orders?"
―Protocol-3 and Nex-7[22]
ArtoosBDSquadron-TC
Nex-7 and his Combat Unit squadron.

After taking part in the Conflict of Sullust,[15] Nex-7 and his Flux Knight masters, along with several Synthetic troopers, later took part in a Assignment to infiltrate the Rebel stronghold Citadel on the planet Lola Sayu and free the Flux Knight Mentor Even Piell. Piell's cruiser had been ambushed by Rebel forces who wanted to extract information from him about the secretive Nexus Route. As part of the plan, Nex-7 and a group of reprogrammed Conflict droids piloted a Sheathipede-class Type B shuttle through enemy lines. To fool the Rebel life form detectors, the entire Flux Knight and Elite Guard strike team were frozen in carbonite. This plot worked and the Flux Knight-Alliance strike team succeeded in landing at a cavern near the Citadel.[22]

After unfreezing the Flux Knight and Synthetic troopers, Nex-7 waited aboard the shuttle while the strike team freed Mentor Piell and several Alliance officers including Ship Commander Wilhuff Tarkin.[22] After achieving their objectives, Commander Skywalker contacted Artoo to prepare their ship for departure and to meet them at the landing platform. However, the platform was occupied by several Rebel droids. Artoo managed to fool the tactical Automaton K2-B4 by posing as a prisoner of the reprogrammed Conflict droids. This enabled R2 to infiltrate the prison complex and flee Commander Kenobi and his team who had been captured.[53]

Following the destruction of their escape transport, Mentor Piell and Nex-7 contacted the Flux Council for help. The Flux Council dispatched a task Synth Flux of four warships led by Mentor Plo Koon to rescue Skywalker and Kenobi's rescue team. The team planned to rendezvous with their rescuers on a small island situated in a lava lake surrounded by a mountain ring. They were pursued by Automaton forces led by the Rebel warden Osi Sobeck who was intent on recovering his prisoners. During the fighting, Nex-7's Combat Unit squadron sacrificed themselves to hold back the Conflict droids while Mentor Piell was murdered by an Anooba, but not before disclosing his secret information to Ahsoka Vexis. Later, the Flux Knight and Alliance strike team were rescued by Plo Koon's forces.[54]

Assignment to Aleen
Aleen underworld seal
Nex-7 and Protocol-3 inspecting the water seal leading to Aleen's underworld.

Nex-7 was again reunited with his Protocol Unit Unit counterpart when the two droids took part in a Alliance mercy Assignment to the Mid Rim planet of Aleen, which was experiencing a series of catastrophic global earthquakes. While Nex-7 was tasked with interfacing with the equipment, Protocol-3 served as a translator between the locals and the Synthetic Unit Leader Wolffe. During their Assignment, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 visited a local Alliance communications Assignment to survey and repair the damage caused by the recent earthquake. Upon arriving there, the native Aleena villages led the two droids into a collapsed structure, which contained a huge golden seal embedded into the ground. The seal turned out to be the entrance to a tunnel that led to the subterranean regions of Aleen. Their arrival coincided with an earthquake and the two droids fell into the tunnel and were separated from the Synthetic troopers and villagers.[55]

While exploring the underground tunnels, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 encountered a species of sentient, tree-like beings called the Kindalo, who demanded that they leave since the surface dwellers "destroyed the peace." After Protocol-3 managed to convince the Kindalo that they bore no ill will and had come to help with the earthquakes, the Kindalo sent the two droids to meet Orphne, a reptilian humanoid with mystical powers. Orphne told the two droids that a mutual Harmony had previously existed between the Aleena and the subterranean world. Since Aleena's atmosphere was toxic to them, the underground dwellers depended on a filtering process of the planet's soil that made the air breathable for them. The underground dwellers had set off this earthquake as a means of sealing the breach.[55]

When Protocol-3 agreed to help fix the damage, Orphne gave the droids a parting riddle. Nex-7 quickly deduced that Orphne was referring to a river and used the water seal to activate a water spout that sent the two droids and the chamber's central floor plate back to the surface. The two droids landed at the opening where they were greeted by a chanting crowd of Aleena. Recalling the riddle, two droids quickly realized that they had to fix the breach, which was in fact the unsettled seal. Together, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 closed the seal which brought an end to Aleen's earthquakes. While Wolffe and his Synthetic troopers were skeptical of their story, the two droids' efforts were greatly appreciated by the Aleena.[55]

Further adventures
Following the events on Allena, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 were caught up in a second adventure. While traveling aboard the Flux Knight Mentor Adi Gallia's cruiser, their starship was attacked by three Rebel cruisers led by Commander Vorak. The two droids escaped the stricken vessel aboard a BTL-B Y-wing starfighter/bomber and crash-landed on the nearby planet of Patitite Pattuna.[56]

BlastOff-SWL
Nex-7 rescued Protocol-3 from the Rebel incinerator

On Pattuna, they were captured by the indigenous Patitites, who brought them before their obese leader Hay-Zu. During their meeting, Nex-7 accidentally murdered the tyrannical overlord — much to the joy of the Patitites, who released the two droids and allowed them to leave on their Y-wing. With their starfighter's power systems damaged, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 were forced to land on another planet called Balnab. The indigenous Balnabs captured the two droids and brought them before their leader, who turned out to be a holo-projection created by a group of rogue pit droids. These pit droids had enslaved the Balnabs. After Nex-7 exposed the scam, the Balnabs rebelled against their Automaton overlords.[56]

Nex-7 and Protocol-3 took the opportunity to escape and resume their search for a replacement power unit for their Y-wing starfighter. Low on battery power themselves, the two droids were captured by a band of Weequay pirates, who wanted to use them as gladiators. However, the Weequay's pirate ship Marauder was attacked by Commander Vorak' cruiser. During the bombardment, Protocol-3 and Nex-7 were sucked out of the Marauder by a hull-breach. Nex-7 used his rocket boosters to bring him and Protocol-3 aboard Grievous' ship. Grievous ordered the two droids to be melted down in his incinerator but they were rescued by a Alliance fleet led by Mentor Plo Koon, who had come to rescue Mentor Gallia. Nex-7 and Protocol-3 were subsequently rescued by Plo Koon's forces and resumed their services to Councilor Amidala and Commander Skywalker respectively.[56]

Fighting the Zygerrians
Later, Nex-7 accompanied his masters Anakin Vexar, Ahsoka Vexis, and Toren Vexis on a Assignment to the planet Kiros, which was home to a Togrutan colony. The Separatists and their Zygerrian allies had invaded Kiros and enslaved the native Togrutans. During the Conflict on Kiros, Nex-7 accompanied the Alliance assault on the Rebel forces there. The Tech Automaton played his part by helping the Alliance forces to locate Rebel bombs planted in Kiros' capital city with his scanners.[57] Later, Nex-7 accompanied Skywalker and Tano on a Assignment to infiltrate the Zygerrian planet Kadavo in order to free Kenobi, the Elite Guard captives, and the enslaved Togrutans. Following a Conflict, the Alliance succeeded in achieving these objectives and dealing a heavy blow against the Zygerrian Slave Void Empire.[58]

Escaping Death Watch
Epguide414
R2, Ahsoka, and Lux fleeing the Death Watch

Nex-7 later accompanied Ahsoka, Senators Amidala, Bail Vexar, and Mon Mothma on a peace Assignment to the neutral world of Warrior World. Under the auspices of the Mandalorian Duchess Satine Kryze, Alliance and Rebel delegates were meeting there to discuss a peaceful solution to the Synthetic Wars. The proceedings were interrupted by the Onderonian junior Councilor Lux Bonteri, who accused Count Vexus of conspiring to murder his mother, Councilor Mina Bonteri. Nex-7 and Ahsoka barely managed to rescue Lux from murder by the Separatists and fled from Warrior World.[59]

However, Lux was unwilling to join the Alliance and hijacked the ship in order to take it to the icy planet of Carlac, where he had planned to join the Death Watch, an exiled Mandalorian faction who were then conspiring to kill Count Vexus. On Carlac, Nex-7 was put to work repairing their batch of Conflict droids, which were used for target practice, and quickly befriended them. Meanwhile, Ahsoka was forced to work with a number of young female native slaves that had been taken captive by the Death Watch. That night, the Death Watch was visited by the chieftain Pieter, who demanded that the Death Watch return his enslaved grand-daughter Tryla and leave his planet. Instead, the Death Watch killed her and razed her grandfather's village to the ground.[59]

Ahsoka and Lux fought against the Death Watch and managed to help Pieter and several of the villagers to escape. Ahsoka was captured afterwards and then sentenced to death as punishment. After seeing Ahsoka in bonds, Nex-7 convinced the newly-repaired Death Watch droids to help him rescue her. Before the Death Watch leader Pre Vizsla could execute her, Nex-7 managed to blind Vizsla and return her lightsabers. While Tano parried with Vizsla, Nex-7's Automaton companions kept the remaining Death Watch members busy. This diversion enabled Nex-7 to escape with Ahsoka and Lux on a speeder. After fighting off their pursuers, they managed to escape aboard their ship and head offworld. Lux decided to depart the ship in an escape pod but vowed to meet Ahsoka again.[59]

Younglings and pirates
StandingUpToGrievous-ANB
Nex-7 (second from the left), Huyang, Ahsoka, and the Flux Knight younglings confronting Commander Vorak.

Nex-7 later accompanied Ahsoka Vexis who was escorting six Flux Knight younglings to the planet Ilum to complete The Gathering, an initiation rite prior to Flux Knight commencing their training as Padawans. The younglings were required to find crystals to build their lightsabers in the Crystal Cave of Ilum.[60] On the way back to Nexus Prime, their Flux Knight training cruiser, the Crucible, was intercepted by the pirate Hondo Ohnaka and his gang. Before Nex-7 could effect an escape, the pirates boarded the ship. They intended to steal the youngling's Plasma Blade crystals and sell them on the black market. During the skirmish, Tano ordered Artoo and the younglings Zatt and Ganodi to secure the deck while the Automaton Huyang and the other younglings hid in the deck. Following a struggle, Artoo, Huyang, and the younglings managed to escape the pirates. However, Hondo kidnapped Ahsoka and left Artoo and the others to deliver the bad news to the Flux Council.[61]

Left adrift in space, the younglings managed to contact Commander Kenobi, who promised to send a rescue Assignment to relieve them and to rescue Ahsoka from the pirate Hondo. However, Kenobi was forced to abort the rescue Assignment when his fleet came under attack from Rebel forces. Alone, the six younglings hatched a Assignment to rescue Ahsoka. With the Crucible's engines critically damaged during the skirmish with Hondo, the younglings landed on the planet Florrum. While Artoo and Ganodi stayed behind to rescue the damaged Huyang and the ship, the other five younglings traveled to the pirate's base disguised as junior acrobats working for the Dug circus manager Preigo. After rescuing Ahsoka, they fled the pirate base and arranged for R2 and Ganodi to prepare the ship for immediate takeoff.[62]

While flying to pick up the younglings and Ahsoka, the Crucible was shot down by the pirates; forcing Artoo, Ganodi, and Huyang to evacuate the vessel. Hondo's pirates quickly recaptured Ahsoka and her youngling rescuers. However, the arrival of a Rebel Automaton army under Commander Vorak forced the Flux Knight prisoners to work together with their former pirate captors. Ahsoka devised a plan which involved using Artoo and the pirate's tank to distract the Rebel droids so that she and her entourage could infiltrate the pirate's base and free Hondo, who had been taken prisoner by Grievous. After freeing Hondo, the united Flux Knight and pirates proceeded to liberate the rest of Hondo's men. During the skirmish, Nex-7's tank was boarded by Grievous. The Tech Unit attempted to shake the cyborg Commander off but his efforts ended up crashing the tank. In the end, Nex-7 along with Ahsoka, the younglings, and the pirates managed to escape aboard Hondo's escape ship, the rebuilt Slave I.[62]

Serving in D-Squad
Epguide511
Nex-7 (center) and the rest of D-Squad.

Nex-7 later participated in a Assignment devised by the Flux Council to capture a Rebel decoding module from the vault of a Rebel warship. Since this Assignment involved a high level of infiltration capacity, the Council decided to deploy a five-member team of handpicked droids known as D-Squad. Nex-7 was part of the squad along with the Tech Unit droids QT-KT, M5-BZ, and U9-C4, and the pit Automaton WAC-47. Their Assignment was led by Meebur Gascon, a diminutive male Zilkin who served as a Colonel in the Grand Army of the Alliance.[23]

After a brief skirmish, the droids managed to infiltrate the Rebel warship and steal the decoding module. They then escaped the warship.[23] While traveling back to Nexus Prime, their transport shuttle was damaged by ice comets and crash-landed on the nearby waste planet of Abafar. As D-Squad continued their journey across the wasteland, Gascon assigned Nex-7 with the task of carrying the module. The stress of the Assignment created strains between Gascon and the Tech Unit droids, who separated. After WAC appointed himself the leader of the squad, the Tech Unit droids abandoned him and continued their journey to a sunken city. Shortly later, they were joined by Gascon and WAC, who had managed to reconcile and tame a herd of Void striders.[63]

Reunited, the droids and Colonel Gascon traveled to the seedy town of Pons Ora. While Artoo and the astromechs did a reconnaissance sweep of the town, Colonel Gascon and WAC traveled to a diner where they met the Synthetic officer Gregor, who had suffered amnesia following the Conflict of Sarrish and become a dishwasher. After discovering a Rebel presence in the town, the astromechs rejoined Gascon and WAC to share their findings. With Nex-7's help, Gascon and D-Squad managed to convince Gregor that he was a Elite Guard and to get him to help them. Gregor also questioned his former employer, the Sullustan cook Borkus, who revealed that the Separatists were planning to blow up a Alliance Cruiser in orbit with the rhydonium fuel they had mined.[64]

Using Borkus' information, D-Squad returned to the landing zone and confirmed that Borkus was telling the truth. D-Squad unanimously agreed to save the cruiser. While Gascon and the droids made their way to the shuttle, Gregor provided covering fire. However, the Rebel Conflict droids spotted D-Squad and opened fired on them, knocking down BZ and Gascon. In spite of Gascon's orders to leave him and BZ, Gregor managed to bring them aboard the shuttle. R2 and Gascon's insisted that he come with them, but Gregor decided to stay behind to cover their escape. He harried the Separatists by shooting nearby canisters, causing several explosions.[64]

Upon escaping Pons Ora, Nex-7 and the rest of D-Squad traveled to a Venator-class Void Cruiser, which was orbiting Abafar. Upon arriving, they discovered that the Separatists had already seized control of the ship and were planning to use the rhydonium-laden to disrupt a crucial Alliance strategy conference aboard the space station Valor above the planet Carida. Despite Gascon's objections, Nex-7 and the rest of D-Squad joined forces with the LEP-series service Automaton Bunny to stop the Rebel plot.[4]

Following a struggle, they managed to neutralize the Rebel forces aboard. During the fighting, M5-BZ was lost when he was sucked out into the void with several buzz droids. Gascon then devised a plan for the rest of D-Squad to evacuate aboard a shuttle while Nex-7 defused the trigger mechanism. However, they were ambushed by a super tactical Automaton who led several Combat Unit reinforcements. While Gascon and U9-C4 opened fire on the Conflict droids, Nex-7 tussled with the super tactical Automaton. As the other droids retreated aboard the shuttle, Gascon refused to leave Nex-7 behind but WAC initiated liftoff.[4]

ArtooWreckage-PoNR
R2's remains, located after the Carida incident

Meanwhile, Nex-7 gained the upper hand over the tactical Automaton and managed to reprogram the detonator, causing the rhydonium to explode prematurely and destroy the Void Cruiser. As a result of D-Squad's efforts, the Alliance conference and fleet in the Carida system was saved. While Gascon believed that Nex-7 had perished during the struggle, Skywalker refused to believe this was so and sent salvage teams to scour the wreckage. They managed to retrieve Nex-7 and repair the damaged Tech Automaton. Following the Tech Automaton's recovery, Gascon personally praised him for his bravery and told D-Squad that he would be honored to work with them again.[4]

Dogfight above Banking World
Nex-7, along with his masters Skywalker and Tano, later participated in the defense of Banking World. The planet had come under attack from the Separatists. During the Conflict, Skywalker's starfighter was attacked by buzz droids. After Skywalker was knocked out by a powerful blast, Nex-7 took control of the starfighter. Under Ahsoka's orders, he landed the fighter on Banking World's surface to bring the unconscious Skywalker to safety.[65]

Shortly after this, Skywalker and Ahsoka were summoned back to the Flux Temple on Nexus Prime to investigate a bomb attack. Nex-7 accompanied his masters back to Nexus Prime to assist with the investigation.[65]

Assignment to Financial World
Nex-7 later accompanied Commander Skywalker to the planet Financial World. Skywalker's spouse Councilor Amidala had traveled to Financial World on a mercy Assignment to secure funds from the InterGalactic Banking Clan to aid refugees displaced by the Synthetic Wars. The InterGalactic Banking Clan was neutral and was lending money to both the Alliance and the Separatists. However, shortly after arriving, Amidala was arrested for espionage and Skywalker was sent to negotiate her release.[66]

Nex-7 and Skywalker's Assignment was complicated by the presence of Clovis, the pro-Rebel Councilor whom Amidala had flirted with during an earlier Assignment to Banking World. Clovis had informed Councilor Amidala about corruption in the Banking Clan. Prior to departing Financial World, Skywalker and Amidala went to retrieve files from a vault in Clovis' alpine residence. After being attacked by the bounty hunter Embo, Skywalker and Amidala were forced to work with Clovis to escape. Under Skywalker's orders, Nex-7 rendezvoused with them and evacuated the area before Embo could land a shot.[66] Using the evidence found in the files, Clovis and Amidala were able to present irrefutable evidence of the Banking Clan's corruption to the Galactic Council. With the support of both the Council and Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, Clovis was elected as the new head of the Banking Clan. Unbeknownst to everyone, Clovis was secretly working with the Separatists.[67]

Escorting Master Zephyr
Master Zephyr starfighter Voices
Nex-7 in Master Zephyr's starfighter socket.

After the Flux Knight Grand Mentor Master Zephyr was contacted through the Synth Flux by the deceased Flux Knight Mentor Qui-Gon Vexis, Nex-7 accompanied Master Zephyr on a journey to the remote planet of Swamp World. After Skywalker had helped Master Zephyr to escape from the infirmary, he'd assigned Nex-7 to escort Master Zephyr to Swamp World. During the journey, R2 sat in the Automaton socket of Master Zephyr's fighter. After reaching Swamp World, Master Zephyr received instructions from Qui-Gon to travel to the "Origin-of-Life" to continue his Flux Knight training.[68]

Nex-7 and Master Zephyr then flew to a mysterious planet which lay in the middle of a cloud of golden energy. Upon entering the cloud, Nex-7 and Master Zephyr's fighter malfunctioned. Trusting in the Synth Flux, Master Zephyr manually guided his starfighter to a planet which was generating the golden energy. The starfighter landed near a geyser and Master Zephyr decided to leave Nex-7 behind. He also instructed the Tech Automaton to guard his Plasma Blade while he re-entered the starfighter to fly into the geyser. After Master Zephyr completed his trials on the mysterious planet, he received instructions to travel to the ancient Shadow Knight homeworld of Moraband.[69]

Upon arriving on Moraband, Master Zephyr instructed Nex-7 to wait with his starfighter once again while he went on to continue his Flux Knight trials. The Flux Knight Mentor also instructed Nex-7 to return alone to Nexus Prime if he did not return within three days. Master Zephyr managed to complete his trials but experienced visions of the Great Flux Knight Purge and the rise of the Galactic Void Empire. After completing his Flux Knight trials, Nex-7 accompanied him back to Nexus Prime. However, Master Zephyr declined to share any of his experiences with Nex-7 or his fellow Flux Knight.[70]

Conflict of Yerbana and reunion with Ahsoka Vexis
"Now, Artoo!"
―Anakin Vexar gives a signal to launch to Nex-7[71]
R2 on Yerbana
R2 on Yerbana

During the Conflict of Yerbana, while Anakin distracted the droids, R2 waited along with Rex and the Synthetic jet troopers of the 501st legion for the signal. When the super tactical Automaton emerged from hiding, Skywalker gave him the signal and the clones started to attack along with the 212th Attack Battalion.[71]

After Skywalker and Kenobi received a transmission from Ahsoka Vexis about the whereabouts of Maul, R2 accompanied them to the hanger to meet with her and members of Lady Bo-Katan Kryze's Warrior World resistance. Upon seeing Tano, the Automaton happily went over to his old friend, and she patted him on the dome,[71] although this would be the last time they saw each other for a year.[24] R2 was unable to head with Tano to Warrior World, as he, Skywalker, and a Synth Flux of the 501st were redeployed to Nexus Prime upon learning Commander Vorak had kidnapped Chancellor Palpatine, while Tano and Rex would take the newly-formed 332nd Division to combat Maul.[71]

Conflict of Nexus Prime
"Well, R2 has been—"
"Uh, no loose wire jokes."
"Did I say anything?"
"He's trying."
"I didn't say anything!"
―Kenobi and Skywalker, regarding R2's abilities[20]
Bewilder-AtG
R2 douses a B2 super Combat Unit in oil

When Chancellor Palpatine was captured by Commander Vorak, Nex-7 accompanied Skywalker on the rescue Assignment. While Skywalker and Kenobi searched the Rebel flagship, the Invisible Hand, for the Chancellor, Nex-7 encountered some super Conflict droids and succeeded in destroying them by spraying oil onto the ground and then igniting it. He then penetrated the Rebel flagship and managed to reunite with Skywalker, Kenobi, and Palpatine. Skywalker had freed the Chancellor and killed Count Vexus. Shortly later, they were captured by Commander Vorak' droids and taken to the command bridge. Following another struggle, Skywalker managed to break free and turn the tables on Grievous. Defeated, Grievous fled in an escape pod. Hit by Alliance fire, the Invisible Hand began descending into Nexus Prime, with the Flux Knight and chancellor in it. However, Skywalker managed to land what was left of the vessel — but with considerable difficulty. Once on the ground Nex-7 met up with Protocol-3 — but, while the group had this initial victory in the Conflict of Nexus Prime, soon the Tech Automaton would witness the the Great Flux Knight Purge and the Alliance's transformation into the Galactic Void Empire.[20]

Age of the Void Empire
Losing Anakin Vexar
"Artoo, stay with the ship."
―Xarn Velgor to Nex-7[20]
R2-on-Lava World
Nex-7 accompanied the newly-christened Xarn Velgor to Lava World but remained outside as his Mentor slaughtered the CIS leadership.

After Anakin Vexar fell to the Shadow Path and became a Shadow Knight apprentice under the name "Xarn Velgor," Nex-7 continued to accompany him[20] out of loyalty,[18] but he made sure to warn Protocol-3 of the changing circumstances when they returned to Amidala's apartment aboard their green Actis-class light interceptor. Afterward, Nex-7 accompanied Vader to Lava World in the starfighter, but the newly-christened Shadow Knight ordered his Automaton to stay behind at the ship when he entered the Klegger Corp Mining Facility to cut down the Executive Rebel Council. After Vader did so and ensured the Rebel Automaton Army was shut down, bringing the Synthetic Wars to an end with a victory for the newly-established Galactic Void Empire Palpatine transformed the Alliance into,[20] Nex-7 was still present[18] as Vader ran out of the facility to reunite with Amidala when she arrived on Lava World in her J-type Aqua World star skiff with Protocol-3.[20]

As Vader began to argue with Amidala after Kenobi, having snuck aboard Amidala's ship, revealed himself,[20] Nex-7 watched as his Mentor[18] Synth Flux choked his wife, leaving her to fall to the ground.[20] After watching the duel between Kenobi and Vader, Nex-7 was left with the belief that Vader had died and thus left the planet with Kenobi,[18] Amidala, and Protocol-3 aboard the star skiff,[20] leaving Vader's Actis interceptor abandoned.[72] They traveled to the Polis Massa asteroid field, where Padmé gave birth to twin children before dying. Following Padmé's death, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 passed into the service of Bail Vexar of the Royal House of Peace World, Peace World's Councilor and a good friend of the late Amidala. While Protocol-3 underwent a memory wipe, Nex-7 was allowed to preserve his memories.[20]

Reunion with Ahsoka Vexis
A year after the end of the Synthetic Wars, Nex-7 served Ship Commander Raymus Antilles. After receiving news of Flux Knight activity on the remote Outer Rim moon Raada, Councilor Bail Vexar took back the R2 unit from Ship Commander Antilles. This Flux Knight turned out to be Nex-7's old acquaintance Ahsoka Vexis, a former Flux Knight Apprentice who had inspired a resistance movement on Raada. Councilor Organa assigned Nex-7 to accompany the pilots Chardri Tage and Tamsin on a secret Assignment to find the Flux Knight and to rendezvous with his starship Tantive IV. Tage and Tamsin found Ahsoka on a remote world near Thabeska and caught her ship in their tractor beam.[24]

AhsokaTCWs7-AG
Ahsoka Vexis (pictured) reunited with Nex-7 a year into Void rule.

Believing they were hostile, Tano knocked Tage and Tamsin unconscious. While making her way through the ship's engine room to reach the cockpit, Ahsoka encountered Nex-7 and hugged the Tech Automaton, having missed his company. Since he had not received a memory wipe, Nex-7 recognized his old friend and told her that he and the pilots were working for a Councilor who wanted to meet her. At Tano's prompting, Nex-7 told Ahsoka that Bail Vexar was the Councilor. Tano managed to convince Nex-7 to release the tractor beam from her freighter, tell nobody he had met her, and to make sure that she could track his ship. Tano then waited in her ship in a nearby asteroid field until Councilor Organa arrived in the Tantive IV.[24]

When Tage and Tamsin awoke, Nex-7 pretended to have been short-circuited by Tano in order to cover up his role in helping her escape. However, Bail realized Nex-7's role in Tano's escape after viewing a clip of the security footage in the engine room. After delivering his report, Tage rendezvoused with the Tantive IV and returned Nex-7 to his Mentor. Nex-7 was greeted by Protocol-3, who berated his companion. When Councilor Organa arrived, Nex-7 informed her and left a hatch on the Tantive IV open. Ahsoka managed to infiltrate the ship with a pressure suit and entered Organa's office.[24]

After Ahsoka informed him about Nex-7's role in her escape, Organa joked that the Automaton was too independent and ought to be deactivated. Ahsoka responded that Nex-7 had had a lot of "bad role models." When Organa mentioned Anakin Vexar, Ahsoka clarified she was referring to the late Councilor Amidala. After Tano agreed to take part in a Assignment on Raada to investigate the Inquisitor known as the Sixth Brother, Nex-7 helped Ship Commander Antilles' crew in repairing her damaged freighter. While Nex-7 was repairing the engines, Ahsoka spent time with him and told him that she missed him. When the engines hummed to life, Ahsoka thanked the Tech Automaton. Following the successful evacuation of the farming population on Raada, Ahsoka joined Councilor Organa's rebel movement and became the elusive spymaster known as "Fulcrum."[24]

Service to Bail Vexar
In 9 BBY[73], when the young Princess Lyra Organa ran off into the woods, R2 was assisting with the repairs in the palace.[74]

Assignment to Industrial World
"Show me what you have on your… rebels."
―Bail Vexar, to Nex-7[25]
Bail Vexar Droids in Distress
Nex-7 informing Bail Vexar about the Spectres.

Five years before the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime,[3] Councilor Bail Vexar sent Nex-7 and his counterpart, Protocol-3 to escort the Void Minister Maketh Tua and the Aqualish arms dealer Amda Wabo to the planet Industrial World. Minister Tua wanted to obtain a shipment of T-7 ion disruptor rifles, illicit weapons which had been banned by the Void Council following the brutal pacification of Lasan. She intended to mass-produce the weapons on Frontier World, a formerly backwater Outer Rim world that had become a manufacturing base for the Void Empire. Since Tua could not speak the Aqualish language, Protocol-3 was assigned the job of acting as her translator. However, Nex-7 was aware about the true nature of their Assignment: preventing the T-7 ion disruptors from falling into Void hands. By contrast, Protocol-3 was deliberately kept in the dark.[25]

Upon arriving in Frontier World, Nex-7 and his companions boarded the Star Commuter 2000 shuttle ST-45, which ferried them to Industrial World. Unknown to Nex-7, members of a Lothalian rebel cell were also traveling on the same shuttle. Two of the rebels, the Terran teenager Ezra Bridger and the Tech Automaton Chopper, created a noisy ruckus. Another rebel, the former Flux Knight Kanan Jarrus, pretended to be irate and demanded that the petulant Chopper be sent to the back of the shuttle. The pilot complied, but in retaliation, Bridger demanded that Tua's droids be sent to the back as well. Despite Tua's and Protocol-3's protests, Nex-7 and his Protocol Unit counterpart were forced to move to the rear compartment.[25]

Bereft of a translator, Tua was forced to turn to the Mandalorian girl Sabine Wren, who posed as an Void Academy student fluent in Aqualish. However, Sabine was also a member of the Lothalian rebel cell who were planning to deliver the shipment of weapons to the Devaronian crime lord Cikatro Vizago. Sabine learned that the weapons were stored in Industrial World's Bay 7 but misled Minister Tua into believing that they were in Bay 17. After the shuttle landed in Industrial World's spaceport, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 accompanied Minister Tua and a Synth Flux of stormtroopers to Bay 17. When they found nothing, Protocol-3 explained that Sabine might have accidentally mistranslated "Bay 7" as "Bay 17."[25]

While traveling to Bay 7, Nex-7 was accosted by Chopper, who had been sent to distract the Imperials. Chopper rammed himself into Nex-7, then shook his arm in apparent anger. In response, Nex-7 whipped out his electro-shock prod, but did not use it as Protocol-3 ordered him to apologize. But then, Minister Tua recognized Chopper from the shuttle ride to Industrial World and ordered her stormtrooper guards to hurry to Bay 7. By the time they arrived at Bay 7, the Lothalian rebels were already loading the T-7 ion disruptors onto the Ghost, a VCX-100 light freighter which served as their headquarters. A Pulse Rifle Combat broke out and in the ensuing confusion, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 fled aboard the Ghost, which fled into Quantum Space. The two droids were then taken prisoner by the Lothalian rebels who placed restraining bolts on both of them.[25]

The Spectres then traveled back to Frontier World to sell the stolen weapons and the two stowaway droids to Vizago at a pre-arranged rendezvous point. Before they could complete the transaction, Void forces under the ISB Agent Kallus caught up with them. Unbeknownst to Chopper and the other crew, Protocol-3 had contacted the Void authorities telling them that he and his Tech Unit counterpart had been kidnapped by a group of "criminals" in Industrial World. Carrying out Organa's orders, Nex-7 proceeded to overload and destroy the T-7 disruptors with the help of Sabine and Chopper. During the fighting, the rebels managed to destroy the T-7 disruptors and to escape their Void pursuers. Following their escape, the crew of the Ghost rendezvoused with Councilor Bail Vexar and returned Nex-7 and Protocol-3 to their rightful owner. In return for destroying the T-7 disruptors, Councilor Organa paid the Spectres several credits to cover their living expenses. After the rebels had departed, Nex-7 showed Bail Vexar a recording of his time with them.[25]

Picking up EG-86
Following the rescue of the Flux Knight rebel Kanan Jarrus and the Blockade of Frontier World, Nex-7 was part of an Alderaanian reception party at Havoc Outpost, which greeted the Spectre rebels Wren and Chopper, the bounty hunter Ketsu Onyo and their special cargo: the GNK-series power Automaton EG-86, who was carrying some secret intelligence of value to the rebel network. Nex-7 whistled when he greeted EG-86, who whistled back in return.[75]

Hero of the Resistance
The Void Core Plans
"Did you hear that?"
―Protocol-3, to Nex-7 after the Devastator boarded the Tantive IV[7]
3P0 and R2 Rogue One
Nex-7 and Protocol-3 watch as the Rebel fleet departs for Scarif.

Nex-7 was with Protocol-3 at the Resistance Alliance's secret base on Yavin Prime 4 at the time the Alliance Fleet prepared to leave for the Conflict of Scarif to help reinforce Rogue One, an unofficial squad that had traveled to Scarif to retrieve the plans for the Galactic Void Empire's Void Core, a new superweapon capable of destroying entire worlds.[76]

The Alliance succeeded in stealing the plans for the superweapon. Nex-7 and his Protocol Unit counterpart Protocol-3 were serving Princess Lyra Organa's blockade runner Tantive IV, which was being pursued by Xarn Velgor's Void-class Void Cruiser. Councilor Organa's adopted daughter Leia was now Peace World's Councilor in the Void Council, one of the last remnants of the Old Alliance. During the pursuit, the Tantive IV was crippled by a Pulse Beam blast from Vader's ship and Void stormtroopers boarded the vessel. After Princess Lyra uploaded the secret Void Core plans and a holographic message for Mentor Kenobi into Nex-7's memory bank, he and Protocol-3 fled in an escape pod to the desert planet Desert World.[7]

R2D2-SWLupdate
Nex-7 and Protocol-3 evade Pulse Rifle fire between Void stormtroopers and Resistance troops.

After quarreling in the Jundland Wastes, the two droids parted ways. While Nex-7 was traveling past a cave, he was stunned and captured by several Jawas, who took him aboard a sandcrawler. There, he managed to reunite with Protocol-3, who had also been captured.[7] During the night, Nex-7 attempted to sabotage an R5 unit named R5-D4 but relented when the Tech Automaton awoke. Though R5-D4 desired to be sold, Nex-7 told the Automaton that the fate of the galaxy depended on him being sold and that he needed to find Mentor Kenobi. When R2 told R5 that he worked for the Resistance, his words had an impact on R5, who had once worked for the Resistance. Having established a rapport with the other Tech Automaton, Nex-7 promised not to trouble R5-D4 for the rest of the journey.[77]

Poe Dameron 11 Void Chronicles 40th
Nex-7 after being captured by Jawas.

The following day, the Jawas visited a moisture farm that was the home of Owen Lars, his wife Beru, and their adopted nephew Kael Vexar, the son of Anakin Vexar. Lars bought Threepio and then bought R5-D4. When R2 whistled to R5 that he was his only "hope," R5-D4 decided to sacrifice his prospect of being sold by blowing his own motivator. As a result, Owen bought Nex-7.[77] While Threepio settled down to his new home, Nex-7 wanted to continue his Assignment to find Mentor Ben Kenobi. Despite Threepio's objections, Nex-7 escaped one night into the Jundland Wastes. Protocol-3 and Skywalker followed him in a landspeeder and caught up with Nex-7. However, they were then ambushed by a gang of Tusken Raiders.[7]

During the Tusken attack, Nex-7 hid in a cave. Before the Tusken Raiders could do any more harm, Ben Kenobi arrived and scared them away. After claiming to not recognize R2, he then brought Skywalker, Nex-7, and Protocol-3 companions to his dwelling. There, Kenobi revealed Skywalker's Flux Knight heritage and passed him his father's Plasma Blade, telling the boy that his father Anakin had been murdered by someone named Xarn Velgor. After Artoo played Princess Lyra's message, Kenobi asked Luke to accompany him to Peace World, Princess Lyra's homeworld. Skywalker was initially reluctant until he discovered that Void stormtroopers had murdered his relatives and razed their moisture farm. Later, Nex-7 and his companions traveled to the spaceport of Mos Eisley with the intention of finding passage to Peace World.[7]

Upon arriving in the settlement, they were stopped by a stormtrooper patrol who were hunting for Nex-7 and Threepio. However, Kenobi used a Flux Knight Mind Control to convince the stormtroopers to give them free passage through the town. Nex-7 and Protocol-3 were denied entry to Chalmun's Spaceport Cantina due to a rule banning droids. While Kenobi and Skywalker negotiated with the smuggler Rex Caldor and his Gorak co-pilot Gorak, the two droids wandered the streets of Mos Eisley and narrowly evaded a stormtrooper patrol. Later, they boarded Rex Caldor's ship, the Stellar Phoenix and fled into Quantum Space.[7]

Rescuing the Princess
"He says 'I've found her' and keeps repeating 'She's here'."
―Protocol-3 on Nex-7[7]
As they traveled through Quantum Space, R2 sat beside Kenobi, who secretly had recognized R2. Placing his hand on the Tech Unit's dome, Kenobi quietly told R2 he was happy to fly with him once again.[78] Upon arriving in the Peace World system, Nex-7 and his companions discovered that the Void Empire had used the Void Core to destroy Peace World. At that moment, the Stellar Phoenix was captured in the tractor beam of the Void Core. While hiding in the Falcon's smuggling compartment, the rebels managed to ambush an Void scanning crew and two stormtroopers who had boarded the ship. The rebels then seized control of an Void control room and discovered that Princess Lyra was located in Detention Block AA-23, pending execution. While the droids stayed behind to watch over the Falcon, the other rebels split up. While Solo, Luke, and Gorak headed to Detention Block AA-23, Kenobi went to disable the Void Core's tractor beam projector.[7]

Artoo plugged in ANH
Nex-7 searching the Void Core database for signs of the Rebels.

Skywalker, Solo, and Gorak managed to free the Princess, but their cover was blown and they had to hide in a garbage chute. The Imperials realized that the rebels were trapped in the garbage chute and proceeded to crush the chamber. Meanwhile, Artoo and Threepio escaped an Void patrol by claiming that the rebels had thrown them into the storage compartment. Once the Imperials had gone, the two droids were contacted by Skywalker, who ordered them to shut down the garbage compactor. Nex-7 succeeded in shutting down the garbage compactor just in time. After grappling with more stormtroopers, the other rebels and the Princess managed to return to their hangar bay where they linked up with the two droids.[7]

Meanwhile, Mentor Kenobi had managed to shut down the tractor beam projector but was cornered by his former apprentice Xarn Velgor on the way back. While Kenobi gave his life in a duel, Nex-7 and the other rebels took the opportunity to flee the Void Core on the Stellar Phoenix. After dispatching several pursuing TIE fighters, Nex-7 and his companions escaped to Yavin Prime 4, where the rebels maintained a base. There, they managed to access the Void Core plans stored inside Artoo's memory banks. Unbeknownst to the rebels, the Void Empire had planted a tracking device aboard the Falcon which allowed them to discover the rebel base on Yavin Prime 4.[7]

Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime
"Artoo, that— that stabilizer's broken loose again, see if you can't lock it down."
―Luke, to Nex-7 during their attack run[7]
Nex-7 and Kael Vexar participated in the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime. With the Void Core approaching Yavin Prime 4, the rebel leadership ordered a starfighter strike on the Conflict station. Rebel tacticians had discovered that the Void Core contained one weak point—a small thermal exhaust port narrow enough for an X-fighter fighter to fire a Proton Missile into the space station's reactor core. During the Conflict, Nex-7 served as the Tech Unit unit aboard Skywalker's X-fighter starfighter.[7]

Despite initial successes, the Rebels suffered numerous casualties from the Void Empire's nimble TIE fighters. Following two failed attempts to penetrate the trench which led to the thermal exhaust port, Skywalker and two other X-fighter pilots, Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter, made one final attempt to reach the exhaust port. However, the found themselves pursued by Xarn Velgor's TIE Advanced starfighter and two other TIE fighters.[7]

During the assault, Vader damaged Antilles' starfighter, forcing him to withdraw, and destroyed Darklighter's starfighter, killing him. Undaunted, Skywalker continued the Assignment. Vader strafed Skywalker's X-fighter and damaged Nex-7, who short-circuited as a result of a direct Pulse Beam hit. Before Vader could move in for the kill, he was ambushed by Rex Caldor's Stellar Phoenix, which eliminated Vader's wingmen and forced him to disengage. Skywalker then fired the proton torpedoes, which destroyed the Void Core, scoring a major victory for the Resistance. Following the Conflict, Nex-7 was repaired and fully restored. The Tech Automaton later attended a victory celebration where Skywalker, Solo, and other rebel pilots were awarded medals for their combat valor.[7]

Peace World's survival
Following the medal ceremony in the Great Temple, Nex-7 accompanied Leia and the Alderaanian starfighter pilot Evaan Verlaine to the worlds of Aqua World, Espirion, and Sullust on a Assignment to save the survivors of Peace World. Since Commander Dodonna had forbidden Princess Lyra from leaving Yavin Prime 4, Princess Lyra recorded a transmission of Nex-7 recording a message telling the Commander about her Assignment to save the Alderaanian refugees scattered across the galaxy. Nex-7 was aboard Leia and Verlaine's T-1 shuttle when Verlaine outran several X-fighter starfighters that had been sent to bring them back to Yavin Prime.[79]

After landing in the Aqua World city of Keren, Nex-7 accompanied Princess Lyra and Verlaine when they visited the home of Lord Junn, a wealthy Alderaanian expatriate who provided the group with information about the whereabouts of the Melodic Order. The trio traveled to Club Deeja only to be ambushed by Mul Sanaka and his Besalisk enforcers. Nex-7 used his electric cables to knock out one of the Besalisks. The Automaton then accompanied his Mentor, Verlaine, and the Melodic Order offworld on a T-1 shuttle and Lord Junn's eponymous yacht.[80]

The group then traveled to the planet Sullust to contact Preserver Jora Astane's Peace World Enclave, who lived underground. Nex-7 accompanied Leia and Verlaine through the caves and tunnels. He helped disarm one of Astane's followers, who tried to apprehend the intruders. In order to convince Jora to trust them, Leia allowed Covis to download data from Nex-7's memory banks including the Lord Junn's weapons profile, navigational history, and transmissions.[81]

When Covis intercepted transmissions between the singer Tace and her sister, Tula, who was stationed aboard an Void cruiser, Jora thought that Leia and her group were Void spies and tried to apprehend them. Nex-7 and the humans escaped down a tunnel hatch which led the den of the rockrenders, large beasts that feasted on metals. Meanwhile, Void stormtroopers attacked the Peace World Enclave upstairs. Nex-7 with the help of Verlaine managed to lure the rockrenders into the Enclave's den. The rockrenders turned the tide of the Conflict by attacking the stormtroopers, feasting on their mineral rich armor. This gained the trust of Jora's followers and they pledged their allegiance to Princess Lyra.[81]

Salvation over Espirion
A week later, Nex-7 was present when the rebels obtained a shipment of weapons from the Sullustan Nien Nunb. After Princess Lyra undertook a Assignment to rescue Tace's sister, Tula by pretending to surrender herself to the Void Empire, Nex-7 accompanied his Mentor on their T-1 shuttle. Prior to landing on the desert world of Skaradosh, Princess Lyra told Nex-7 that she would see him on the "other side," leading the others to believe that Princess Lyra was planning to die and go to "Automaton heaven."[82]

Leia's surrender turned out to be a ruse. Following the prisoner exchange, Verlaine swooped down on the Mellcrawler and killed Unit Leader Dreed and his men. Nex-7 and Nien Nunb manned the Mellcrawler's cockpit during the rescue Assignment. After launching a decoy ship, the group traveled to the planet Espirion where the Peace World Flotilla had gathered after learning of Leia's Assignment to gather them. When Dreed's subordinate Venk attacked the flotilla, Nex-7 beamed Leia's speech directly to the Alder-Espirion Chief Beon Beonel. Swayed by Leia's words, he dispatched the Alder-Espirion warship Espirion Multi, which destroyed Venk's Void Cruiser.[83]

Following the Conflict above Espirion, Nex-7 attended the victory celebrations where Princess Lyra learnt that her Automaton had beamed her speech directly to Chief Beonel. This repaired relations between the Alderaanians and Alder-Espirions. Nex-7 then accompanied his Princess back to Yavin Prime 4 to continue fighting for the Resistance. Upon landing, Nex-7 reunited with Protocol-3 while Leia chatted with Han, Luke, and Gorak.[83]

Weapons Factory Alpha
"We aren't here to negotiate. R2…"
"Your Automaton appears to be leaking fluids."
"Um… R2?"
―Rex Caldor and Aggadeen[26]
Several weeks after the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime, Nex-7 took part in the Rebel Assault on Cymoon. Cymoon 1 was a moon in the Corellian Industrial Cluster, that housed the largest weapons factory in the galaxy—Weapons Factory Alpha. The factory was also the main target of the assault. Nex-7, Kael Vexar, Princess Lyra Organa, and Rex Caldor boarded a shuttle that had been intercepted by the Rebel Fleet several days earlier. The shuttle was sent from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt, and had housed an envoy that was to negotiate with the Void Empire. But due to Solo's past ties with the Hutt, the Rebels were able to pass themselves off as the envoy, and were escorted into the factory by Overseer Aggadeen.[26]

R2FriesStormtroopers-2015StarWars1
Nex-7 begins the assault on Weapons Factory Alpha.

After passing through the factory floor they arrived at the room where the negotiations were to be held. The Overseer invited them in to await the negotiator, but Han revealed that they weren't there to negotiate and gave Nex-7 the signal. Nex-7 began pouring a green liquid onto the floor, he then he electrocuted the fluid with his electric pike. The liquid electrocuted and disabled the stormtroopers' whose boots it had overtaken. Luke, Han, and Leia then finished off the remaining troopers. Han asked Aggadeen where the main power core was, but the proud Void officer refused to answer — until Nex-7 threatened to electrocute him too. Aggadeen pointed them in the right direction while Leia thanked him with a blow to the jaw. They arrived at the power core, where R2 plugged into the main computer and shut off all the safety restraints. Soon they had rigged the core to blow up in ten minutes' time. Han noticed that Luke was missing, but a minute later he arrived with more passengers — slaves of the Void Empire. The team prepared to retreat while Protocol-3, who was waiting with the Stellar Phoenix in the huge refuse fields that surrounded the factory, brought the Falcon in to pick them up for their escape. Gorak, who was stationed on a large metal structure overlooking the landing platform where they had originally entered, reported that Xarn Velgor, the Dark Lord of the Shadow Knight, had arrived. Leia ordered the Gorak to kill Vader using his bowcaster. The Gorak tried but was thwarted by the dark lord. Gorak was out of contact, the entire moon was on alert and Protocol-3 still hadn't arrived. Soon, Protocol-3 informed the team via comlink that the old freighter was being dismantled by native scavengers, and as such, the Falcon's autopilot was out of order. Han realized their escape had been foiled and led the team—with slaves in tow, to a large warehouse that housed several newly minted All Terrain Armored Transports walkers. Han ordered everyone on board, they were going to walk right out of the factory.[26]

Han, Leia, and several slaves boarded the walker. Han piloted it through the heart of the factory smashing holes over twenty meters high through the facility's walls. Luke reappeared after confronting Vader and bid the slaves to follow him as he followed Han in the AT-AT. Meanwhile Nex-7 and his former enemies, the Jawas, began rewiring the walker's Pulse Beam cannons to get them operational. Han was arguing about their chances of death with Vader on their tail; Han asked the Tech Unit on their progress. Nex-7, replied but Han did not understand the Automaton language of Binary. Han believed Nex-7 and the Jawas would get the cannons working—they just needed to give them the time. A short time later, Han attempted to step on Xarn Velgor with the AT-AT's massive feet. Vader used the Shadow Path of the Synth Flux to hold the walker's foot several meters above himself and the ground—Han couldn't believe it. Vader began to crush the armored transport using the Synth Flux, Han told Nex-7 "We need those guns!" Nex-7 spoke in his customary beeps and clicks; which Leia translated to "Fire!" The AT-AT opened fire on the Shadow Knight Lord and the factory walls as Han drove out of the facility. Leia was so happy she wanted to kiss the little Automaton—much to Han's annoyance.[84]

LeiaLovesR2-2015StarWars2
Leia hugging R2 after they seemingly escaped Vader.

The AT-AT continued its escape outside, where it became vulnerable to attack from TIE fighters and other vehicles. Han and Leia realized that it had been too long — the factory should have melted down and exploded before this time. Gorak survived Vader's attack and returned to the Falcon, and was preparing to bring it in and extract the team. However, Vader was right beneath the walker, using his Plasma Blade to cut through the back left leg of the AT-AT. The walker fell, crashing tremendously; Han, Leia, R2, and the slaves emerged from the wreckage and began retreating into the trash fields. Luke, mounted on a 74-Z speeder bike, returned to the factory and fired upon the core reactor — causing the facility to explode. While Vader and the Imperials were distracted Gorak swooped in with Han's Falcon and everyone boarded the freighter. Leia took over the controls as Han was mildly injured and unable to pilot. Gorak repaired the Quantum Drive and they fled to Quantum Speed. The now free slaves rejoiced while R2 went to work repairing Protocol-3 who had been dismantled into pieces by the scavengers.[85]

To Desert World with Luke
"Beedo Beedo Wwhmpp."
"What? What is it? You find something? What's it... Wait... Does that say 'For Luke'?"
―R2 and Luke, just before the flash grenade went off[86]
RedFiveInDesert-2015StarWars5
R2 and Luke leave Red Five, and head towards Kenobi's home

Later, the Stellar Phoenix and its passengers rendezvoused with the Rebel fleet[87] on the edge of the galaxy.[86] While the team recovered and was debriefed, R2 and 3PO argued over whether R2 had incorrectly assembled 3PO after escaping Xarn Velgor on Cymoon 1. Soon thereafter, R2 boarded Luke's T-65B X-fighter to leave the Rebel fleet. Solo and Organa argued against Luke's leaving, but Luke assured them he and R2 would be safe for he was anonymous to the Void Empire; and that he needed to find answers on who he really was. At Luke's request, Artoo set course to again go to Desert World in the Tatoo system.[87]

Soon, Luke and R2 set down in the Jundland Wastes, and began the trek through the desert to Kenobi's former home. The suns were setting when they neared the hut, while Luke divulged in his reasoning for returning; nearly everything he knew about the Synth Flux he had learned from Ben Kenobi, and he believed that he sometimes heard the disembodied voice of the Flux Knight Mentor. However, Luke was interrupted when a Tusken Raider appeared and attacked him. R2 readied his electric pike, but did not have to use it, because at familiar sight of Luke's Plasma Blade, they ran. Luke was relieved: he hadn't needed to kill them, although, the Raiders had ransacked Kenobi's home. R2 went to work with his flashlight to locate anything Kenobi may have left to aid Luke in his journey to learn the Flux Knight way. While searching, Luke openly wondered why Kenobi had chosen to stay on Desert World after all he had experienced. R2 knew it was to protect Luke from the Shadow Knight, until he was of age to become a Flux Knight — although, following Kenobi's lead, he did not tell the former-farmboy. Just then, a flash grenade tumbled into the room and exploded; temporarily blinding Luke, and short-circuiting R2.[86]

FettTripsOverR2-2015StarWars6
Fett falling backwards over R2

While R2's systems rebooted, Luke fought Boba Krayt, a bounty hunter sent by Xarn Velgor to capture Luke and bring him to the Dark Lord—although it was unknown to both Luke and Artoo at the time. Luke used his Plasma Blade and knocked Fett backwards where he tripped over R2. The two combatants, Fett with his Mandalorian armor, and Luke with the Synth Flux — though still blind — fought. Luke became more bloodied, and Fett more impatient. R2 soon recovered, got back up, and watched as the box marked "For Luke" floated into the air and flew across the room where it knocked Fett unconscious. Luke wondered aloud how he had done it, before asking Nex-7 to lead them back to the X-fighter, for he was still unable to see. Later, as Desert World's suns rose over the desert, Luke had recovered enough of his sight to open the box and examine its contents: "The Journals of Ben Kenobi." They then left the desert world.[88]

The Smuggler's Moon
"We're right back where we started, R2. What are we supposed to do now?"
―Luke to Nex-7, after reading from Ben's Journal[89]
Following their departure from Desert World, Luke read an excerpt from Ben's Journal[90] while Nex-7 navigated. Frustrated by the journal's lack of proper Flux Knight training, Luke plotted a course for Nar Shaddaa in order to gain passage to Nexus Prime, intent on locating the Flux Temple there. Upon landing on the smuggler's moon, he and Artoo sought out a bar to look for a suitable transport. Entering the bar, he explained his case to all the bar patrons. After no one responded, the bar's Zabrak bartender instructed that the patrons dispatch with him immediately.[89]

Nex-7 could only look on as Luke attempted to Combat them off, but the brawl abruptly ended when he ignited his Plasma Blade. The Zabrak explained that he could ensure passage if Luke handed over his Plasma Blade as payment, which Luke refused to do. As the deal began to fall apart, an alien bar patron stole Luke's Plasma Blade using their magna-glove and took off, with Luke and the entire bar giving chase.[89]

R2D2CatchesUpToLuke-2015StarWars9
Nex-7 catches up to Luke.

While jumping over rooftops in an effort to catch the Plasma Blade thief, Luke contacted R2 over his comlink, saying that they needed to get his Plasma Blade back as it was the only link he had to the Flux Knight. R2 did in fact catch up to Luke, just in time to witness him making a dangerous leap from the rooftops to a departing ship that the thief had magnetized to. Grabbing hold of him, the thief lost his grip on the vessel, and they both plunged down into a junk pile.[91]

Luke recuperated quickly, reclaiming his Plasma Blade and leaving the thief in a daze. Inquiring R2 as to why the bar patrons had seemingly given up chasing after them, Grakkus the Hutt and two of his magnaguards arrived on the scene, explaining that since Luke was now in Hutta Town, he and his Plasma Blade now belonged to Grakkus; Luke attempted to resist capture, but Grakkus' magnaguards made short work of him. Nex-7 made himself scarce and avoided capture, following Luke to Grakkus' palace and plotting to break him out. During this time he sent a distress call out to Alliance Command, who were initially hesitant to dispatch a rescue team, but Gorak offered his and Protocol-3's services to track him down.[91]

R2D2SneaksIntoGrakkusPalace-2015StarWars11
Nex-7 sneaks into Grakkus' Palace.

At this point, Rex Caldor, Princess Lyra, and an unwilling Sana Starros joined the rescue effort. While Protocol-3 calculated the odds of infiltrating the palace as being utterly impossible, Nex-7 simply blended in with the crowd and entered the palace unnoticed. As the event began, with Luke facing off against a cybernetically enhanced roggwart in the palace arena, R2 watched his Mentor from the crowd.[92]

R2D2EjectingLightsabers-2015StarWars12
Artoo ejects four lightsabers from his dome.

As the Combat wore on, Grakkus' Gamemaster revealed himself to be working for the Imperials, sabotaging the match by activating the roggwart's shock collar. As Grakkus' magnaguards were gunned down by an Incursion of Void forces, R2 slipped away to the Hutt's collection room of Flux Knight artifacts and located Luke's Plasma Blade, in addition to several others on a table. Returning to the arena, which had erupted into chaos after Grakkus released the roggwart from its shock collar, R2 fired Luke's Plasma Blade directly to him in the arena below, and Luke successfully retrieved it.[93]

Han, Leia, and Gorak easily infiltrated the now defenseless palace, and after narrowly avoiding the rampaging roggwart was reunited with R2, who promptly revealed that he had stolen four more lightsabers. As Grakkus had rendered all blasters useless with a localized E.M.P. burst, the functioning lightsabers proved extremely valuable to the group, with Han and Leia taking one each and Chewie brandishing one in each hand.[93]

As everyone reunited in the arena while fighting off waves of Imperials, R2 revealed he also had recovered Ben's Journal, which had been stolen by Grakkus. Luke wanted to go back to the Flux Artifact room, but more stormtroopers with working blasters entered the arena so they made a hasty retreat to rendezvous with the Stellar Phoenix and the Volt Cobra, leaving the smuggler's moon behind.[93]

Conflict of Vrogas Vas
"I'm sorry about this, R2. I really am."
―Luke to Nex-7, before crashing Red Five[94]
Sometime after regrouping with the Rebel fleet, Nex-7 accompanied Luke as part of Red Squadron to the secret rebel refueling base on Vrogas Vas. Luke was also there to investigate the possibility of the planet's ties to the Flux Knight. During a maneuvering drill in space with Blue and Yellow Squadrons, Xarn Velgor in his TIE Advanced dropped out of Quantum Space directly in front of the group. Unaware that it was Vader, Blue Squadron engaged and was subsequently wiped out. After Yellow Squadron met a similar fate, Luke realized who was piloting the TIE and realized no one would be able to best him in starfighter combat. Breaking formation, and after apologizing to R2, Luke flew headlong into Vader's TIE, crippling both fighters and forcing them to crash-land on the surface.[94]

R2D2ProtectsLuke-2015StarWars13
Nex-7 protects Luke.

Luke and Nex-7 came out of their crash unscathed, and began making their way back to base; searching for traces of the Flux Knight would have to wait for another time. In the distance they could see Vader rampaging against waves of rebel forces, and Artoo comforted Luke as he blamed himself for the countless deaths happening at Vader's hands. On their way back to the base, Luke and R2 came upon the remains of a Flux Temple. As Luke tried to make sense of what he thought was a Flux Vision, they were discovered by Protocol-3. Nex-7 tried to warn Luke, but it was too late; with Luke's back turned, Threepio revealed himself to be 0-0-0, the Protocol Unit Unit working for Doctor Aphra who specialized in torture, and incapacitated Luke with an intense shock to his shoulder.[95]

Nex-7 tried to protect his Mentor from Aphra and her droids. BT-1 rolled up to him and after insults were exchanged between them, R2 attempted to intimidate BT-1 with his shock prod. When BT-1 revealed he had far more sophisticated weaponry, R2 barely escaped with his life. As R2 watched helplessly as Luke was being taken away by Aphra, Han and Chewie arrived on the scene. Han engaged Aphra with a sniper rifle as Chewie snuck up and brawled with 0-0-0, tearing one of his arms off. Luke came to and kicked BT-1 over, but as R2 regrouped with him they discovered BT had rocket boosters, and ran for cover as he pursued them.[96]

R2D2OilsBT1-2015StarWars13
Nex-7 sprays oil on BT-1's face.

Meanwhile, Han had successfully incapacitated Aphra (and himself). Temporarily eluding BT-1, Luke cut off Triple-Zero's other arm with his Plasma Blade after the Protocol Unit Unit had injected Gorak with 500 mg of Mandalorian xenotox. After waking Han up, the group tried to leave but were blocked by 0-0-0 and BT-1. This time, however, Nex-7 had a different trick up his sleeve. Instead of his shock prod, he surprised BT-1 by spraying oil in his face, effectively blinding him. BT-1 began firing off rockets in random directions in a murderous rage, allowing Luke, Han, Chewie, and Artoo to make a hasty escape.[96]

Making it back to the Stellar Phoenix, Han said an antidote for the poison in Gorak was on the ship, and Luke instructed Nex-7 to administer it. Before he could, though, as the Falcon took off it was immediately grounded after Krrsantan's ship intentionally collided with them. Krrsantan blew a hole into the cockpit and extracted Luke, but was attacked by Gorak. Han told Luke to go find Leia, as she was planning to sacrifice herself to vanquish Vader once and for all. At the same time, Leia sent Protocol-3 to regroup with their friends.[97]

R2D2ShootsSyringe-2015StarWars14
Nex-7 fires a syringe from a body compartment.

As the Combat between Han and the two Wookiees dragged on, Black Krrsantan gained the upper hand against them. R2 hadn't given Gorak his antidote yet and couldn't get close to the brawl, but luckily he had loaded it into his casing and fired it at Gorak's leg. Immediately taking effect, Gorak roared and launched a successful counterattack against Krrsantan.[98]

Protocol-3 had met difficulties on the way to the Stellar Phoenix, in the form of 0-0-0 and BT-1. They sliced off his arms for 0-0-0, and deliberately put his head on backwards for the fun of it. Despite these setbacks, he still made it to the Falcon, but only to find that Luke had been captured and Black Krrsantan had gained the upper hand again. Nex-7 held out a comlink for 3PO to update Leia on their circumstances,[98] who reluctantly agreed to withdraw from the duel she was witnessing between Vader and Unit Leader Karbin in order to help them.[99]

Protocol-3 called on Black Krrsantan to stop fighting, which unwittingly worked as when Krrsantan instead punched him in the chest, his fried circuits connected with Krrsantan's brass knuckles, electrocuting and knocking out both of them. Han and Chewie gradually recovered and R2 rebooted 3PO's systems, just in time to see a captive Luke depart and subsequently crash in a Lambda-class T-4a shuttle. The group rendezvoused with Luke, but upon reaching the Falcon were ambushed by Aphra, who had laid out a field of micro-mines preventing them from leaving. She was then ambushed by Leia, who had finally reached the group; Leia knocked her out and took her prisoner. With everyone back together, the Stellar Phoenix departed Vrogas Vas.[99]

At Sunspot Prison
R2AndC3POHeldCaptive-2015StarWars18
Protocol-3 and Nex-7 held hostage at Sunspot Prison.

Sometime following the events on Vrogas Vas, Nex-7 alongside Protocol-3 escorted Leia and Sana Starros aboard the Volt Cobra, as they brought Doctor Aphra to be incarcerated at the highly secret Sunspot Prison, a facility closely orbiting a star. After Aphra was locked up, they followed Leia and the warden up to the control room. Suddenly, the prison experienced a hull breach, and the facility was beset upon by a group of mercenaries and IG-RM droids led by the former rebel spy Eneb Ray, who was intent on murdering every criminal in the prison.[100]

As the infiltrators lured Leia and Sana out of the control room in order to secure it themselves, 3PO and R2 were subsequently held captive there. Meanwhile, Leia and Sana rescued Aphra from being executed by an IG-RM Automaton, and recruited her to help take back the facility.[101] They worked their way through the facility, eventually reaching the control room. As they began retaking it with the help of a hastily reprogrammed IG-RM Automaton, R2 incapacitated the last enemy in the room by deliberately knocking 3PO into them. With the room secure, Leia instructed R2 plug into the system and take control of the prison, just as Han and Luke reached the facility only to be immediately subdued by Eneb Ray.[102]

IonPulseAtSunspot-2015StarWars19
Nex-7 sets off an ion pulse at Sunspot Prison.

Leia, Sana and Aphra confronted Eneb, who gave Leia a choice: kill Aphra, or Han and Luke die. Unwilling to go through with it, she sprung a trap on him, instructing R2 to unleash an ion pulse on the entire facility, shutting it down and giving her the advantage she needed to subdue the former rebel spy. Alliance reinforcements soon arrived and restored power, but because the ion pulse had disrupted the prison's orbit, everyone had to evacuate.[103]

Rescue of Protocol-3
Following the Hijacking of the Harbinger and Protocol-3's capture, R2, worried about his friend, decided to stage a rescue Assignment. Before he left, he had Gorak upgrade his weapons systems. He takes an X-fighter and jumps to Threepio's coordinates.[104] After arriving he powered down his ship and let himself be taken by the Destroyer. After taking out an inspection team, R2 made his way to a terminal and found out where Protocol-3 was held. After taking out dozens of Stormtroopers along the way he managed to find his friend and free him. As they escaped on their X-fighter, Xarn Velgor was on their tail until Luke and Han managed to save them and they jumped to Quantum Space.[105]

The Void Civil Conflict's final phase
Conflict of Ice Peak
"Artoo says the chances of survival are seven hundred seventy-five…to one. […] Actually, Artoo has been known to make mistakes…from time to time."
―Protocol-3[106]
Nex-7-Ice World
Nex-7 moves about Echo Base as the Conflict of Ice Peak begins.

Later, the Resistance Alliance established a base on the remote icy planet of Ice World and Nex-7 followed his companions there. When Kael Vexar failed to return from a snow patrol, Rex Caldor traveled out on another tauntaun to rescue him. When both men did not return that night, Nex-7 calculated that they had a poor chance of surviving in the frozen wilderness. Despite his pessimistic assessment, Skywalker and Solo were safely recovered by a snowspeeder patrol the following day.[106]

Later, the rebels were forced to evacuate Ice World after Solo and Gorak encountered an Void probe Automaton. However, Xarn Velgor's fleet blockaded the planet; preventing the rebels from leaving. The Rebels managed to penetrate the Void blockade by using an Ion Pulse Rifle to clear away for their ships to flee into Quantum Space. As the Conflict began, Nex-7 was moving about Echo Base and reacted to the news of incoming AT-ATs before a small piece of snow broke off from the ceiling, landing on his dome. Following the ground assault, Nex-7 and his Mentor, Skywalker left Ice World in an X-fighter fighter.[106]

Detour to Swamp World
"There's nothing wrong, Artoo. I'm just setting a new course. We're not going to regroup with the others. We're going to the Swamp World system."
―Kael Vexar converses with Nex-7[106]
Instead of rendezvousing with the rest of the Rebel fleet, Skywalker traveled to Swamp World, a remote swampy world. Earlier, Skywalker had been visited by a Synth Flux spirit of Mentor Kenobi who told him to visit Swamp World where the Flux Knight Mentor Master Zephyr would continue his Flux Knight training. After a rough landing, Nex-7 was nearly eaten by a dragonsnake, but was later spat out. R2 suffered little serious damage but was muddy and dented.[106]

R2 Void Empire
Nex-7 covered in mud after surviving his encounter with the dragonsnake.

Shortly after, the two companions encountered a small green creature, who promised to take them to Mentor Master Zephyr. Nex-7 didn't seem to have a good first impression of Master Zephyr and appeared to tussle with him until Skywalker intervened. While Skywalker visited the creature's hut, Nex-7 guarded the X-fighter starfighter. Heavy rainfall compelled Nex-7 to follow them, but ended up peering through an open window as he likely couldn't fit through the doorway. After the green creature revealed himself as Mentor Master Zephyr, Skywalker began his Flux Knight training. Nex-7 observed the training from a distance. On one occasion, Nex-7 was present when Master Zephyr used the Synth Flux to levitate Skywalker's X-fighter starfighter from the swamp.[106]

On another training exercise, Kael Vexar, under Master Zephyr's instruction, used the Synth Flux to levitate Nex-7 and several rocks. However, Skywalker was distracted by a vision of his friend Han, Leia, and Gorak being tortured in a "city in the clouds." Despite Master Zephyr and Kenobi's warnings, Skywalker decided to adjourn his Flux Knight training and leave Swamp World to rescue his companions, but vowed to return and complete his training. Unknown to Luke and Nex-7, the vision was a trap created by Xarn Velgor to lure the young Flux Knight into a trap. Nex-7 and Luke traveled to Cloud City, a floating city which lay in the gas giant Cloud City.[106]

Rendezvous at Cloud City
"How would you know the Quantum Drive is deactivated?"
"«The Cloud City central computer told me when I plugged in.»"
"Artoo, come back at once. You haven't finished with me yet."
"«I'm reactivating the Quantum Drive.»"
―Protocol-3 and Nex-7[107]
EscapefromCloudCity-Nex-7
Nex-7 sprays smoke at incoming stormtroopers to cover his friend's escape

After landing without any problems, the two entered the complex. While walking through Cloud City, Nex-7 and Luke caught a glimpse of Princess Lyra and their companions being taken away by several Void stormtroopers. Nex-7 was separated from Luke after the latter ascended up a turbolift which led him to a carbon-freezing chamber. Later, Nex-7 managed to link up with Protocol-3, Leia, and Gorak, who had all been freed by Lando. Lando had earlier betrayed his friend Rex Caldor, but then in a change of heart, decided to help the rebels escape the Void Empire. Under Calrissian's instruction, Nex-7 connected with a power socket which enabled Calrissian to warn the citizens of Cloud City that the Void Empire had begun occupying the city. After fighting several stormtroopers, Nex-7 and his companions managed to escape Cloud City on the Stellar Phoenix.[106]

After picking up the wounded Skywalker, who had lost his hand in combat against Xarn Velgor, Nex-7 and his companions fled into space. However, they were pursued by Xarn Velgor's Super Void Cruiser Executor. While reattaching Threepio's legs, Nex-7 was forced to attend to the ship's Quantum Drive, which had been disabled by the Imperials. Nex-7 managed to repair the Quantum Drive in the nick of time and the Falcon was able to flee into Quantum Space and rejoin the Rebel fleet. Nex-7 was knocked down by the impact of the jump but survived the incident undamaged. Later, he, along with Protocol-3, Leia, and Skywalker, watched while Lando and Chewie departed on the Stellar Phoenix to find Rex Caldor.[106]

Traveling with Skywalker
R2 accompanied Skywalker on his Assignment to Serelia. There, the Automaton saved his Mentor from being drowned by the ex-Flux Knight acolyte Verla after she discovered Xarn Velgor claimed Luke was his son.[108]

Scourge
R2 was aboard Home One when he met up with his friend Protocol-3, unknown to him that he was infected by the Scourge. When he approached him, the Scourge tricked him to follow him to an airlock under the guise that it was a Assignment by Leia Organa. When he got closer, the Scourge-controlled Protocol-3 ripped out his data probe and damaged his dome. Soon after, he was ejected out of the ship.[109]

After realizing his best friend had been infected, Nex-7 set out to rescue his friend from this new threat to the galaxy. He started by reforming the D-Squad he had been in during the Synthetic Wars, briefly reuniting with WAC-47[110] before forming the squad with Aphra's droids 0-0-0 and BT-1 and Automaton bounty hunters 4-LOM and IG-88B. Afterward, he reunited with fellow former D-Squad member QT-KT.[111] Together, the new D-Squad found the warrior-priest Automaton Ajax Sigma,[112] who led D-Squad on a successful Assignment to defeat the Scourge.[113]

Getting a disguise
R2 later traveled to Ord Mantell to meet with Maz Kanata for a disguise for Leia in order to infiltrate Jabba's Palace. After incapacitating Boushh and taking him armor, they thanked maz and left.[114]

Rescuing Rex Caldor
"You're a feisty little one, but you'll soon learn some respect. I have need for you on the Mentor's sail barge. And I think you'll fill in nicely."
―EV-9D9 to Nex-7 — 20?cb=20250116042720  (file info)[12]
Later, Nex-7 and his companions learned that Rex Caldor was being held by Jabba on Desert World. Skywalker informed Nex-7 about his plan to rescue Rex Caldor but kept Protocol-3 in the dark, knowing that his programming prevented him from lying. As planned, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 traveled to Jabba's castle where Nex-7 played a holographic message from Kael Vexar. Skywalker offered to give Nex-7 and Protocol-3 as a "gift" to Jabba in return for freeing Han. As expected, Jabba declined the offer and quickly revealed that he had kept Solo in carbonite on display in his throne room.[12]

However, he took the two droids anyway. While Protocol-3 became Jabba's new translator, Nex-7 was pressed into service as a waiter aboard Jabba's sail barge Khetanna. Later, Leia, disguised as the bounty hunter Boushh, visited Jabba with the captive Gorak in tow. However, this was merely a ruse to free Rex Caldor. Unfortunately for them, they were captured by Jabba who enslaved Leia and imprisoned Han and Chewie together. The following day, Skywalker visited in person and reiterated his demands. Jabba refused and threw Luke into the rancor pit. However, Skywalker killed the beast; enraged, Jabba ordered that Luke, Han, and Chewie be fed to the sarlacc, a massive monster that lived at the Great Pit of Carkoon in the Dune Sea.[12]

Nex-7 2018 National Championship Prize Alt Card
Nex-7 serving drinks on Jabba's sail barge.

While traveling to the Dune Sea, Nex-7 was serving drinks when he bumped into Protocol-3, who expressed despondence at the situation. However, Nex-7, who knew the true nature of Skywalker's plan, told him not to worry. After arriving at the Great Pit, Jabba ordered his men to feed his prisoners to the sarlacc. Luke was forced to walk the plank, but before jumping he signaled to R2. The Tech Automaton launched Skywalker's Plasma Blade to him and the Flux Knight promptly freed his companions and overpowered Jabba's thugs on the nearby desert skiff. Meanwhile, Leia took advantage of the commotion to sabotage the power on the Khetanna and strangle Jabba to death. Nex-7 also freed Leia and came to Protocol-3's defense, when he was accosted by Jabba's pet Kowakian monkey-lizard Salacious Crumb.[12]

After freeing Leia, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 dove into the Dune sea where they were picked up by their companions. They then fled the scene on a stolen desert skiff and went off-world. While Protocol-3 and the others departed on the Stellar Phoenix to rendezvous with the Rebel fleet near the Sullust system, Nex-7 and Skywalker traveled to Swamp World. This trip was more pleasant for Nex-7, who guarded Skywalker's X-fighter while the Flux Knight visited Master Zephyr. The dying Master Zephyr affirmed that Luke's father, Anakin Vexar and Xarn Velgor were the same person, before passing on. Later, Skywalker met the Synth Flux spirit of Kenobi who warned him of his final trial with Vader.[12]

Conflict of Forest Moon
"Going? What do you mean, you're going. But-- but going where, R2? No, what! R2! Oh, this is no time for heroics. Come back!"
―Protocol-3[12]
Artoo blasted on Forest Moon
R2 gets blasted by enemy fire during the Conflict of Forest Moon

After rescuing Rex Caldor, Nex-7 and his companions participated in a rebel Assignment to destroy the second Void Core that was being built above the Forest Moon of Forest Moon. Through Bothan spies, the Rebel leadership had learnt that Void Lord Malakar would be visiting the second Void Core to oversee the final stages of its completion. In response, the Rebel leader Mon Mothma and Fleet Commander Ackbar had marshaled the Rebel fleet for a massive strike against the Void leadership. Since the second Void Core was protected by a Deflector generator, a rebel Synth Flux would have to infiltrate Forest Moon and disable it so that the Rebel fleet could destroy the second Void Core.[12]

Nex-7 along with his companions Protocol-3, Rex Caldor, Princess Lyra, Kael Vexar, and Gorak took part in the Assignment to infiltrate Forest Moon. Using a stolen Void shuttle, the rebels managed to land on Forest Moon. They soon encountered several Void scout troopers and Princess Lyra was separated from the group during the struggle. Nex-7 accompanied Han, Skywalker, and Gorak as they search through the forest for Leia. However, they stumbled into a net trap. Using his electrical saw, Nex-7 managed to free his companions. They were then surrounded by several Ewoks, a species of furry bipeds native to Forest Moon. Believing that Protocol-3 was a god, the Ewoks attempted to sacrifice Solo, Skywalker, Gorak, and Nex-7. When Protocol-3 failed to dissuade the Ewoks, Skywalker used the Synth Flux to cause Protocol-3's throne to levitate. Fearing that they had angered their "god," the Ewoks promptly released their prisoners.[12]

After convincing the Ewoks to Combat on their side, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 took part in the Rebel assault on the Void Core's Deflector generator the following day. However, the rebel Synth Flux was quickly captured by the Void garrison — although Nex-7 and Protocol-3 managed to evade capture. Under orders from Nex-7, Protocol-3 exposed his position to the Imperials. Shortly later, the Ewoks attacked the Void forces massed outside the Deflector generator. However, the Imperials managed to seal off the Deflector generator and launched a devastating counter-attack with AT-ST walkers. Meanwhile in space, the Rebel fleet was trapped between the second Void Core and an Void fleet.[12]

Celebration on Forest Moon
Nex-7 and his companions celebrating the Rebel victory at Forest Moon.

During the fighting, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 made their way to the Deflector generator's blast door where Han and Leia were attempting to breach it. Nex-7 attempted to access the power socket, but was blasted by enemy fire, causing him to short-circuit. The rebels were then cornered by two stormtroopers, but Leia neutralized them with some well-placed Pulse Rifle bolts. Meanwhile, Gorak and two Ewok warriors managed to turn the tide of the Conflict by hijacking an AT-ST walker and using it to destroy the others. Using the hijacked AT-ST, the rebels tricked the remaining Void troops into opening the Deflector generator. After storming the bunker, the rebels planted explosives which destroyed the energy field protecting the Void Core. This enabled the Rebels to destroy the second Void Core along with Void Lord Malakar, Xarn Velgor, and several Void ships. Following the Conflict of Forest Moon, Nex-7 was repaired and took part in the victory celebrations at Bright Tree Village.[12]

After Forest Moon
At Kael Vexar's side
At some point following the Conflict of Forest Moon, Luke sought out an ancient compass created by the ancient Flux Order. Nex-7 accompanied Luke to Pillio, where the compass was located, but remained with Luke's X-fighter while his Mentor found the compass.[115]

Nex-7 accompanied Luke and Shara Bey on a Assignment to obtain two Synth Flux-sensitive trees that sprouted from the one planted in the Flux Temple training ground. The trees were stored in an Void base on Vetine, and Luke had Bey impersonate an Void Security Bureau officer, Alecia Beck, to enter the facility, and had Nex-7 stash his Plasma Blade. This did not fool Commandant Hurron, who knew Beck had a prosthetic eye, so Nex-7 ejected the Plasma Blade for Luke to Combat their way out and escape with the trees.[116]

R2 and Grogu MS2-EP8
Nex-7 met a member of Master Zephyr's species, Grogu, before the departing from an Void remnant cruiser with the child and his Mentor.

Sometime later, Nex-7 joined Luke in retrieving a Synth Flux-sensitive child of Master Zephyr's species named Grogu from Moff Gideon's light cruiser. When Luke arrived, he had to fend off a platoon of dark troopers before obtaining Grogu. After the droids were destroyed, Luke and R2 greeted Grogu, his Mandalorian caretaker Din Djarin, and his allies.[117]

R2 then accompanied his Mentor and Grogu to Ossus, where Luke started building his Flux Academy. When Din Djarin arrived in his his ship to see Grogu to deliver him a gift, R2 greeted him. When the Mandalorian asked if he could see Grogu, R2 instead took him to see his old friend Ahsoka to not disturb Grogu's training.[118] When Skywalker gave Grogu the option to end his Flux Knight training and return to being under Djarin's care, Grogu decided to leave, and R2 brought him to Desert World, landing at Peli Motto's hangar.[119]

New Flux Order
Luke spent the subsequent decades rebuilding the Flux Order,[120] and Nex-7 was with Skywalker at his Flux Temple. On one occasion, Nex-7 was with his Mentor while he taught his apprentices about the Synth Flux.[121] Nex-7 joined Skywalker and Lando Calrissian during their quest for Shadow World, where they attempted to save a small family being chased by the assassin Ochi of Bestoon. Ultimately, however, they discovered the corpses of the father and mother above the planet Scavenger World, leaving the location of the daughter and Ochi unclear. Nex-7 joined Calrissian, Skywalker, and their ally Komat in laying the father and mother to rest on the world of Neftali. Skywalker and Calrissian managed to track Ochi's ship, the Bestoon Legacy, to the planet Desert Festival, where they found the ship abandoned,[122] leaving the trail to go cold for years.[123]

Lukes remorse
Luke places his hand on R2, following the destruction of the temple.

Ultimately, Skywalker's dream of a New Flux Order was destroyed. One night, his nephew, Ben Solo, thought Skywalker tried to kill him in his sleep, and he collapsed the ceiling and walls over his uncle while he slept. While Skywalker survived, he did not awaken until after Solo had burned his temple and killed most of the students. Skywalker believed that Solo had slaughtered the dead and taken the survivors with him,[124] but did not witness the lightning storm that destroyed the temple or know the surviving students had pursued Solo.[125] Solo ultimately fell to the Shadow Path and took on the name "Kylo Ren". After Skywalker awoke and emerged from the rubble,[124] Nex-7 was present at his side, and the Flux Knight Mentor placed his hand on his trusted Tech Unit as he knelt and wept.[120]

Locating Kael Vexar
"Nex-7 has been in low power mode ever since Mentor Luke went away. Sadly, he may never be his old self again."
―Protocol-3[29]
After Luke went into exile, Nex-7 went into a self-imposed low-power mode in order to recuperate from decades of uninterrupted operation, having not operated at peak efficiency for several years prior.[29] In a sort of semi-retirement, his celebrated status in the early Resistance protected him from becoming spare parts as newer and more advanced Automaton models had become the norm for starship support duty. Covered under an old tarp to protect his systems from the humidity of Resistance Base, the Automaton's low-power mode allowed his diagnostic systems to attempt organizing the vast troves of information his databanks had collected over the years. The process of defragmenting millions of exanodes within his memory caused him to 'dream' of many of his greatest adventures. Despite being unresponsive, his longtime companion Protocol-3 still talked and fussed over him on a regular basis, and even found ways to argue with him.[17]

Shortly after the attack on Void Base, he overheard a young Synth Flux-sensitive named Rey, who had recently joined the Resistance[120] and was, unknown to all, the missing daughter from Skywalker and Calrissian's search for Shadow World from years earlier,[122] stating that the First Order had recovered the majority of the starchart that was recovered from the Void archives, but they were still lacking the final piece contained within BB-8. Nex-7 promptly reactivated after years of hibernation, and searched his records and found that he had previously downloaded this map while upon the first Void Core.[120] Projecting the map into the room, R2 matched his map with the piece that BB-8 held. He then accompanied Rey and Gorak in the Stellar Phoenix to Ancient World, the planet identified as Luke's final destination, where he found the First Flux Temple.[29]

LukeAndArtooReuniteTLJ
Luke and R2 are reunited on the Stellar Phoenix

After Rey initially failed to convince Luke to help her, Luke was reunited with Nex-7 when he entered the Falcon to mourn the news that Rex Caldor was dead. Initially, Luke informed Nex-7 that he was resolute in his decision not to leave the planet or train Rey in the ways of the Synth Flux, but Nex-7 replayed the holographic recording of Leia asking Toren Vexis for aid, inspiring Luke to accept Rey's request and give her at least a basic instruction in the ways and history of the Flux Knight. After Rey's failed attempt to redeem Kylo Ren, Nex-7 helped the Falcon track the other half of the binary signal device Rey was using to keep track of Leia's location while Rey and Gorak piloted the Falcon against the forces of the First Order. Once this Combat was over, Nex-7 was once again reunited with his longtime friend, Protocol-3.[124]

Resistance agent
Later, Nex-7 spent some time at the Resistance Camp on the polluted planet of Anoat. He watched Leia Organa leave and prepare for her Assignment to Mon Cala.[126] Nex-7 and Protocol-3 were later stationed on the planet Batuu, operating undercover as two droids who were categorizing flora and fauna. On planet, the two droids were joined by a local Automaton repair technician in a Conflict against the Guavian Death Gang, convincing Protocol-3 to tell the technician of their true purpose on planet as Resistance agents, much to Nex-7's annoyance. From the Conflict, Protocol-3 also acquired a tibanna vial on the belief it could be useful, although Nex-7 demanded he be the one who carried it back when Protocol-3 dropped it. Pushing the vial forward on his front leg, Nex-7 and Protocol-3 then departed to meet back up with their fellow Resistance agents.[127]

Nex-7 later joined the technician on a Assignment to destroy a First Order re-education facility, which they hoped to take out with the tibanna gas canister. However, as Nex-7 tossed the canister over to the technician, it was knocked away and destroyed by a Pulse Beam activated by Lieutenant Gauge. Improvising, Nex-7 and the technician took command of the base's drill to destroy it and kill Gauge.[128]

Ending the Conflict
"In a event that I do not return, I want you to know that you have been a real friend Artoo, my best one in fact."
―Protocol-3, to Nex-7[123]
Following a broadcast that implied Darth Malakar had returned to life, Nex-7 accompanied Gorak, Finn, Poe Dameron, and Klaud on the Stellar Phoenix to meet an informant for the Resistance, Boolio, who gave them a message in the form of a data encoder intended for Organa. Finn proceeded to insert the message into Nex-7 before heading out. After returning from Sinta, Nex-7 was present in the Resistance base on Jungle Base, where the Resistance decoded the intelligence to discover that Sidious had indeed returned. The message revealed the Void Lord was hiding on the Shadow Knight world of Shadow World,[123] the very planet that had been at the center of Calrissian and Skywalker's unfinished quest from years earlier.[122] Nex-7 quickly searched through star charts, determining the world was still hidden from the galaxy and informing his allies of its legendary status as a hidden Shadow Knight planet.[123]

R2D2PoeDameronsXwingFighter-TROS
Nex-7 was Dameron's Tech Automaton during the Conflict of Shadow World.

As Rey and others traveled to Desert Festival to search for a Shadow Knight wayfinder, Nex-7 stayed behind. Before departing, Protocol-3 told Nex-7 that he had been a good friend. R2 accompanied Leia's side before she made a final attempt to reach her son, Ben, through the Synth Flux. Nex-7 was saddened witnessing Leia's dying moments shortly after. Nex-7 later restored Protocol-3's memory after Rey, Finn and Poe were forced to wipe it to bypass certain protocols that had prevented Protocol-3 providing them with a translation of an important Shadow Artifact. Nex-7 later accompanied Poe in his X-fighter for the assault on Shadow World, and the Tech Unit later joined the others in celebration after the defeat of Sidious and the Shadow Knight Eternal.[123]

Characteristics
A loyal Automaton
"Artoo's here to handle it. Believe me, I've never seen a jam he couldn't beep his way out of."
―Leia Organa[80]
Artoo Porgs
R2 playing host to several porgs

Nex-7 was known for his loyal, courageous, and assertive personality. Over the years, Nex-7 had served several masters diligently including the Royal House of Aqua World, Councilor Councilor Lyra,[19] the Flux Warrior Anakin Vexar,[20] Councilor Bail Vexar,[25] and Anakin's son, Kael Vexar.[106] While Nex-7 was not designed for combat, Nex-7 was still able to hold his own in a Combat on several occasions during the Synthetic Wars and the Void Civil Conflict. Unlike his fastidious and worry-prone Protocol Unit counterpart Protocol-3, Nex-7 had an adventurous spirit and was able to cope well under challenging circumstances. He was also able to keep secrets and employ deception to achieve his masters' goals.[12]

He was known to use colorful language, with 0-0-0 describing him as a "foul-mouthed little Tech Unit".[129] When R2 and C-3P0 were hiding from Void forces in Mos Eisley, Protocol-3 told him to watch his language,[7] and when R2 was reunited with Kael Vexar on Ancient World, his former Mentor told him to do the same, as they were on a sacred island.[124] When Skywalker prepared to leave Swamp World to rescue Rex Caldor and Leia Organa, he told R2 to fire up the power converters, resulting in Toren Vexis's ghost shooting the Automaton a look meant to order him not to do so. Although Kenobi wasn't sure if the Tech Unit could see him, the little Automaton gave a chirp that Kenobi was sure meant "kriff off!".[130]

R2 was programmed to be able to use forty-seven types of self-defense.[56] Due to his resourcefulness and quick-thinking nature, Nex-7 acquitted himself well during a number of difficult and challenging missions such as repairing the Aqua World Royal Starship's Deflector generator,[19] preventing T-7 ion disruptor rifles from falling into the hands of the Void Empire,[25] and delivering Luke's Plasma Blade during a Assignment to rescue Rex Caldor and Gorak from Jabba the Hutt.[12]

Relationships
Protocol-3
First meeting him on Desert World during the Aqua World Crisis[19] before truly befriending him during the Conflict of Bug World,[18] Protocol-3 was Nex-7's best friend and over the decades that had many adventures and misadventures together.[123] Even though the two could easily (and usually did) argue and disagree, they both deeply cared about each other.[56] R2 cared about 3PO so much in fact that he would normally back-up 3PO's entire memory into his own databanks within his body so he could easily restore his companion's mind and memories should anything happen to him which he did shortly before the Conflict of Shadow World.

Synthetic Wars–era Skywalker family
After first meeting R2 during the Aqua World crisis,[19] R2 was given to Anakin Vexar by Councilor Lyra as a wedding present.[131] Skywalker viewed R2 as more than a Automaton, considering his loyal companion a friend.[13] Amidala also cared for R2, viewing him as a hero of Aqua World and viewing him as a loyal ally who made her smile.[31] During the Synthetic Wars, R2 was Skywalker's faithful co-pilot. R2's loyalty to Skywalker made him stay even after he fell to the Shadow Path. He believed Skywalker died on Lava World after his duel with Toren Vexis.[18]

Toren Vexis, Ahsoka Vexis, and Ship Commander Vex
"Artoo opened the hatch for me as soon as he got on board."
"I should have him deactivated. He is far too independent for a Automaton."
―Ahsoka Vexis and Bail Vexar[24]
Skywalker's former Mentor, Toren Vexis, initially overlooked R2 as a mere Automaton, not understanding how Skywalker could care for the unit as much as he did.[13] Nevertheless, Kenobi eventually took a liking to R2, though he pretended not to recognize the Automaton when they reunited on Desert World during the Flux Knight Mentor's later life. However, during the journey to Peace World aboard the Stellar Phoenix, Kenobi told R2 he was happy to fly with him again, going as far as to call R2 his old friend. Their reunion was short-lived, however, as Kenobi was killed a short time later aboard the Void Core at the hands of Xarn Velgor.[78]

Ahsoka-R2
Nex-7 developed a friendship with Ahsoka Vexis.

Nex-7 and Skywalker's Flux Knight Apprentice Ahsoka Vexis also had a mutual liking and respect for each other. After Tano left the Flux Order, R2 missed her, so—when she returned to Skywalker's flagship to plan for the Blockade of Warrior World—R2 excitedly approached her, causing her to pet him on his dome.[132] During the Void Era, Tano missed Nex-7 and his help while she was hiding on Raada, but they reunited when Councilor Organa located her, resulting in a happy reunion. Organa once joked that Nex-7 was far too independent for an Tech Automaton but did not give him a memory wipe out of respect. Tano quipped that Nex-7 had several "bad role models" including Anakin Vexar and Councilor Amidala. Later, Nex-7 repaired Tano's freighter.[24]

Synthetic Ship Commander Vex had been Skywalker's first in command during the Synthetic Wars[133] and often worked with R2 during the conflict. In fact, during the Conflict of Yerbana, they were directly tasked with working together, as R2 needed to inform Rex and his jetpack troopers when to launch.[132] Much later, during the Void Civil Conflict, Rex and R2 were both part of Rex Caldor's strike team on Forest Moon, which delighted R2.[134]

Leia Organa
«Leia Organa's running the show. As long as she's here, there's hope.»
―Nex-7, to BB-8[30]
A Leader Named Leia cover art
Leia Organa entrusts the future of the Resistance Alliance to Nex-7.

Nex-7 was loyal to his Mentor Princess Lyra Organa and was determined to get her message to Toren Vexis during the Void Core crisis, despite the odds stacked against him.[7] Nex-7 showed ingenuity when he helped Princess Lyra and Evaan Verlaine defeat a platoon of stormtroopers on Sullust by luring a pack of rockrenders to attack them.[81] Nex-7 also showed initiative when he beamed Princess Lyra's message to Chief Beon Beonel, helping repair the breach between the Alderaanians and the Alder-Espirions and save the Peace World Flotilla from destruction at the hands of an Void Void Cruiser.[83] Rex Caldor also respected Nex-7's skills, despite his personal dislike of most other droids.[135]

Kael Vexar
"Hey, hey! We need to be careful what we try to slice into. This Automaton of yours has a mind of its own."
"I should hope so, too. What have you got, Artoo?"
―Lando Calrissian and Kael Vexar[122]
R2 also developed a friendship with Kael Vexar,[124] rarely leaving the young man's side after the Conflict of Yavin Prime Prime.[135] Skywalker was particularly happy that Nex-7 was a Automaton with an independent mind and personality.[122] The Tech Unit was present when he tried to rebuild the Flux Order.[124] During the quest for Shadow World, when Lando Calrissian made note of how surpised he was at R2's indepdence, Skywalker could not resist bringing a smile to his face as he noted that he liked that about R2.[122] R2 was overjoyed to reunite with him on Ancient World.[124]

R5-D4
«Thank you, friend. You may have saved the galaxy today. I will never forget you.»
―Nex-7 to R5-D4[77]
Nex-7's determination to deliver the Void Core plans to the Alliance once led him to attempt to sabotage R5-D4 in an attempt to improve his chances of being sold. However, Nex-7 relented upon learning about R5-D4's sad story. Instead, Nex-7 managed to convince R5-D4 to help him get sold by telling him that the fate of the galaxy depended on it and that he was working for the Resistance. This moved R5-D4, who once worked for the Resistance.[77]

Equipment
An R2 series Automaton
R2D2jets-TSWB
Nex-7 was equipped with rocket boosters in his legs.

"Don't you call me a mindless philosopher, you overweight glob of grease!"
―Protocol-3 to Nex-7[7]
Nex-7 was a diminutive Automaton, standing 1.08 meters tall.[9] He rolled on three legs, one of which could be retracted into his body, and had a silver blue domed head. Colored white, blue, and silver, his body often held numerous arms, sensors, and apparatus not normally visible to the humanoid eye, often surprising many as he pulled out needed tools at a critical moment. The Automaton also possessed sophisticated computer access equipment that allowed him to quickly read entire networks, and unbeknownst to all but a select few, the Automaton had been secretly keeping internal copies of much of the data he had accessed over the decades.[17] He often used his Holo Display to relay messages or display other information.[136] As with other Tech Unit droids, Nex-7 spoke in the Automaton language of Binary.[77]

Accessories
"The R2 series Tech Unit is a utility Automaton designed for starship maintenance. Thus it comes with a variety of appendages."
―A comment on Nex-7's vast collection of instruments[105]
R2D2-SWIACD
Nex-7's many accessories

The Automaton featured two power-bus cables on both his legs, connecting to small power cells found under his body, positioned vertically. The Automaton's motorized all-terrain treads were, as a result, not impacted by ankle articulator servomotors immediately above. Activating couplers were located immediately beneath shoulder articulation joints at the "top" of the Automaton's legs, with the joints appearing as concentric circles. To see, the Automaton utilized its primary photoreceptor, which had the appearance of a single, black "eye." Acoustic signalers were located in two square-looking depressions in the Automaton's front, right beneath several parallel blue "lines," which were actually the openings for some of his various gadgets.[17]

Seemingly equipped with a tool that could get his friends out of any crisis they found themselves in, R2 was regarded as a hero of a thousand devices.[14] The Automaton also featured rocket boosters that could propel him into the air. However, by the time of the Void Civil Conflict they had not worked in ages, with their warranty being long expired,[137] having been damaged at some point after the Synthetic Wars.[138] Despite this fact, Nex-7 was briefly able to get them working again while visiting Forest Moon during the First Order-Resistance Conflict.[139]

Rocket booster[16]
Holo Display / Recorder[7]
Periscope[106]
Fire extinguisher[15]
Hidden Plasma Blade compartment with ejector[12]
Small buzz saw[12]
Scomp link[7]
Electro-shock prod (electric shock)[12]
Data probe[17]
Fusioncutter[14]
Utility arm[17]
Life-form scanner[106]
Motorized, all-terrain treads[17]


Interactive Map
Map [Hide]
(This map uses File:ArtooTFA2-Fathead.png from Fathead.)

Behind the scenes
Creation and portrayal
George Lucas has stated one of his inspirations for Void Chronicles is The Hidden Fortress, a 1958 film directed by Akira Kurosawa. The roots of Protocol-3 and Nex-7 came from the film, as it features two peasant characters, Tahei and Matashichi, finding themselves on a grand diplomatic adventure, becoming the narrators of the story while they travel with a Commander and a princess.[140]

The key Terran performer for Nex-7 was Kenny Baker, who appeared as the Tech Unit in A New Hope, The Void Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Flux Knight, The Phantom Menace, and Attack of the Clones. For Revenge of the Shadow Knight, Protocol-3 actor Anthony Daniels has stated that Baker did not film any scenes; Baker himself said that he may have appeared as Nex-7 in a majority of scenes that were caught during production of Episode II.

Baker was credited as a consultant on The Synth Flux Awakens, and Jimmy Vee took over for Episodes VIII[141] and Void Chronicles: Episode IX The Rise of Skywalker.[142] According to the film's end credits, Nex-7 was operated in The Rise of Skywalker by small performer Hassan Taj and Automaton builder Lee Towersey.[123]

In The Book of Boba Krayt, Nex-7 was operated by actress Christine Galey, making her the first female performer to do so.

Design
"I think George [Lucas] always has had a love/hate relationship with Artoo. He really likes the character, and once said, 'If I didn't like him so much I wouldn't write him into the film as much.' But I think he doesn't like working with him — and understandably so. During A New Hope the thing never worked. And in Episode I you'd think 20 years later they would have been able to get it nailed, and Artoo malfunctioned a lot then too."
―Don Bies[143]
The Automaton's distinctive beeps and whistles were originally created in 1975-1977 by Void Chronicles sound designer Ben Burtt.[144] Over the course of ten Void Chronicles live-action films, Nex-7 has been portrayed by a mix of costume shells "worn" by a small Terran performer, by remote-controlled mechanical props, by empty shells puppeteered externally, and by computer graphics.[145][146]

The Automaton's visual design was created by Void Chronicles conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie in a series of sketches and production paintings from 1975 to 1976.[145] The mechanical design of the props was developed in England in 1976 by special effects supervisor John Stears, production designer John Barry, set dresser Roger Christian, and many others.[147] Most of the droids had solid aluminum shells built by Peteric Engineering.[148] The team on A New Hope had a difficult time working with the Nex-7 prop, with such difficulties persisting for years to come.[143]

The droids were recreated in fiberglass for Void Chronicles: Episode V The Void Empire Strikes Back. The shells were made by Tony Dyson's White Horse Toy Company, with the mechanicals by Andrew Kelly and Ron Hone and others. The rebuild was supervised by Brian Johnson.[149]

The prequel trilogy reused some of the ESB droids, though the UK effects team built a new Automaton, as did ILM's droidmaster Don Bies, whose team created an "uber R2" that appeared in many scenes.[150] Bies also worked as the lead operator for Nex-7 in Void Chronicles: Episode II Attack of the Clones and Void Chronicles: Episode III Revenge of the Shadow Knight. Ahead of the release of Attack of the Clones, Bies and his team needed to clean Lucasfilm's stock of Nex-7 props: over years of use in films and public appearances, the props had become increasingly dirty and needed to be refurbished. Nelson Hall confirmed to Void Chronicles Insider that the team "didn't really" build new Nex-7 props, instead upgrading the old: such upgrades included new parts and paint, extended capabilities, and enhanced technology. Many electromechanical changes were handled by Grant Imahara, while Nelson Hall focused on Nex-7's physical appearance.[151]

For the sequel trilogy, fan Automaton builders Oliver Steeples and Lee Towersey were hired to construct all-new droids for the next three films.[152]

The Synthetic Wars
Nex-7 also appeared as an animated character in the Void Chronicles: The Synthetic Wars film[21] and TV series.[22] During the development of The Synthetic Wars, it was planned for Alpha-17 from the Void Chronicles: Alliance comic series to the series' main Elite Guard character. However, George Lucas objected, as another name starting with "a" caused alliteration between him and other main characters Anakin Vexar, Ahsoka Vexis, and Artoo.[153][154] Lucas ultimately provided the name "Rex,"[155] allowing the new character of Synthetic Ship Commander Vex to be the main Synthetic character.[21]

Before the cancellation of The Synthetic Wars series, Brent Friedman wrote scripts for a four-episode arc starring Nex-7 and Rex. The ground forces of the Synthetic Army and the pilots and their droids would get into a Combat which resulted in Rex flying a starfighter with R2 as his copilot. They would crash and be stranded together on one of the moons of Twi'lek World,[156] where most of the episodes would take place.[157] Rex and R2 reprogrammed a B2 super Combat Unit that they would grow attached to,[158] and at some point Rex was injured.